The British Empire The British Empire was the largest empire in human history and lasted nearly half a millennia.
Wishing to break the Iberian monopoly on trans-Atlantic trade he sailed to Portuguese West Africa with his cousin, Francis Drake, to buy slaves that he would later resell in the Spanish New World.
During England’s Civil War the colonies were left to stagnate for a decade, and when Cromwell’s Parliamentarians emerged victorious a fierce naval campaign was waged against the Dutch, who had usurped the majority of trade with England’s own colonies.
Most colonies were Royalist sympathisers, except for the religious dissidents of New England, so Cromwell’s formidably trained Army and Navy were sent to the Caribbean to install pro-Commonwealth leaders, it was at this time that Jamaica was won from the Spanish, although the English forces had a harder time facing tropical diseases than their enemies.
The 18th Century:The 18th Century saw Britain triumph over her European rivals and achieve naval supremacy, and by the turn of the century she was on her way to become the most powerful nation on Earth.
The 19th Century:By the nineteenth century the Royal Navy had become the global forerunner in maritime technology and leadership, and as the world’s first industrial nation Britain was producing goods on a massive scale to be shipped out to colonial and foreign markets.
The Indian Mutiny of 1857 however led to the Crown taking direct control of the colony, disbanding the East India Company and replacing it with the British Raj, which was to invest intensely in India’s infrastructure.
Britain would also seize control of Egypt, following disputes over the ownership of the Suez Canal, to safeguard this new sea-route to India.
Besides the British alliance with France and the Ottomans against Russia in the Crimean War, it would not be until the First World War that Britain would again be in conflict with other empires on a global scale.
The British Expeditionary Force of 1914 was much smaller than the German army, yet governing over a quarter of the world’s population meant Britain could mobilise her Imperial forces on an unprecedented scale.
Whereas Britain had once been the world’s banker, by the end of the Second World War foreign creditors were owed forty billion dollars.
Once the war had been won Europe’s pre-eminence in the world was at an end.
Nonetheless between 1945 and 1965 the number of people over whom the British Empire governed fell from 700 million to just 5 million (3million of whom were in Hong Kong).
From the 1960’s through to the 1980’s the islands of the Eastern Caribbean and Barbados gained their independence, while Anguilla, Turks and Caicos, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, and Montserrat elected to remain under British rule.
It had thrived for so long because of its technological superiority, sheer maritime supremacy, and its colonial economic network.
Centuries of British rule has heavily impacted the independent nations that arose from the British Empire.
Millions left Britain and Ireland to settle the new territories of North America, Australia, and New Zealand.
