Over all the Empire was built on commerce, not conquest.
Most colonies are now independent; today’s Commonwealth is composed of former and remaining territories of the British Empire and a few non former British Empire countries which once belonged to other powers such as Portugal, France and Belgium.
Maps of the British Empire on this site also show the rest of the world and all other empires.
This is to illustrate a comparison of the British Empire with the rest of the world and to show that many territories changed hands and were added to the British Empire by being conquered from other empires or were lost to other empires.
All told, the inhabitants of the British Empire numbered 500,000,000 — more than a quarter of all the people in the world at that time.
As a vessel could not steam much more than 3,000 miles (4,800 km) without replenishing her bunkers, there had to be coaling-sta­tions at intervals of 3,000 miles (4,800 km) or so along the great ocean trade-routes.
In addition, there were facilities for coaling vessels at St. Helena, Ascension, or the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic; at Jamaica or Bermu­da in the North Atlantic, at Gibraltar, Malta, and Port Said in the Mediterranean; at Aden, on the Gulf of Aden; at Colombo in Ceylon (Sri Lanka); at Singapore; and at Labuan in the China Sea; at Hong Kong on the Chinese coast; at Chagos, Seychelles, or Mauritius in the Indian Ocean; at Thursday Island and Suva, Fiji in the South Pacific; nor did these exhaust the list.
From the British Isles along the west coast of Africa to Cape Town, and thence across the Indian Ocean to India and to Australia and New Zealand.
Government — The countries of the Em­pire, aside from the United Kingdom, were divided into five groups, as far as government was concerned: (1) The Dominions, (2) The Indian Empire, (3) The Crown Colonies, (4) The Protectorates, (5) The Mandated Territories.
Until 1920, it was the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland with only one parliament at Westminster for the whole nation which then included all of Great Britain and Ireland.
In 1920, a separate parliament was set up in Northern Ireland, overseen by a Governor, though it continued to be represented at Westminster also.
In 1927, the United Kingdom was restyled as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to reflect these changes.
However, they all continued to be represented in the United Kingdom parliament at Westminster also.
The Dominion of Canada, the Common­wealth of Australia, the Dominion of New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, and the sovereign state of Eire (Irish Free State) were self-governing Dominions under the Crown.
Northern Ireland was also self-governing, but it differed from its sister Dominions in that it sent elected representatives to the Imperial Par­liament at London.
In the Dominions the government was modelled after that of the United Kingdom, the King being represented by a Governor-General or a Governor.
Even though the Dominions were self-governing (fully self-governing after 1931), the United Kingdom parliament still had the final control over their constitutions.
This ended in the Union of South Africa when it became a republic in 1961 and in Canada, Australia and New Zealand in the 1980’s.
In the Indian Empire, the King of Great Britain was also Emperor of India.
Protecto­rates tended, as they developed, to become Crown Colonies, just as Crown Colonies, such as were formerly the states of the Australian Com­monwealth, became self-governing Domin­ions.
In this way it had fallen to the United Kingdom to be responsible for the govern­ment of large territories in Africa, as well as in Asia and in the South Seas.
For the most part these new portions of the Empire were governed as Crown Colonies.
They continued to be governed by the administering powers as Crown Colonies, but under the supervision of the United Nations Trusteeship Council.
Maps on this site show parts of the British Empire in red and the modern Commonwealth of Nations in shades of pink.
