Borobudur is a Buddhist stupa and temple complex in Central Java, Indonesia dating from the 8th century, and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
This is one of world's truly great ancient monuments, the single largest Buddhist structure anywhere on earth, and few who visit fail to be taken by both the scale of place, and the remarkable attention to detail that went into the construction.
It was likely founded as a religious site in the 8th century at the peak of the Sailendra dynasty in central Java.
The construction is thought to have taken a period of 75 years, and completed in about 825 AD.
The details of Hinduism and Buddhism from this period in Java's history can be baffling for visitors.
Together with the records of many royal marriages between Hindu and Buddhist nobles, many Hindu and Buddhist monuments were constructed in the region at this time.
Borobudur and the nearby Hindu Prambanan temple complex were more or less contemporaneous.
Popular theories are that the local population just became disinterested when there were mass conversions to Islam in the 15th century, or they were simply driven away by a large volcanic eruption.
The British governor was Thomas Stamford Raffles (the founder of Singapore), and he took a great practical and academic interest in the history of the mystical island of Java.
On a tour to Semarang in 1814, he was informed about a huge ‘lost’ monument deep in the jungles near Yogyakarta, and he sent a Dutch engineer to investigate.
It took two months to clear the jungle and partially reveal the amazing monument, but it was not until 1885 that the complex was unearthed in its magnificent entirety.
Raffles also presided over the re-discovery of nearby Prambanan, and it is somewhat ironic that the very brief British rule of Java led to the uncovering of both these ancient monuments.
Modern day Borobudur In 1956 UNESCO began an assessment process for the full scale restoration of the monument.
Many have called for the monument to be closed to casual visitors, and for access to be only via timed guided tours.
As well as being the single most popular tourist attraction in modern day Indonesia, Borobudur has resumed its role as an important place of worship and pilgrimage for Indonesian Buddhists.
The 2010 eruption of Mount Merapi[edit]Borobudur was heavily affected by the eruption of Mount Merapi in October and November 2010.
Volcanic ash from Merapi fell on the temple complex, which is approximately 28 km (17.5 mi) west-southwest of the crater.
During the strong eruption of 3–5 November for example, a layer of ash up to 2.5 cm (1 in) thick fell onto the temple.
This also killed nearby vegetation.
The temple complex was closed from 5–9 November 2010 to clean up that ash-fall, and the upper levels remained closed to the public until late September 2011.
More than 55,000 stone blocks from the temple structure had to be dismantled to enable restoration of the drainage system, which had been clogged by slurry after rains.
This restoration programme is predicted to be finished in November 2011.
Borobudur is not only a favorite of foreign tourists, but also domestic tourists, mainly students of all ages, usually in May and June.
If you are planning a visit, try not to visit during school holiday season, it is worth investigating those dates.
Information office[edit]PT Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur Prambanan Ratu Boko, Borobudur Temple Unit Office, Jl Badrawati, Borobudur, ☎
+62 293 788266, e-mail: borobudur@borobudurpark.co.id.
Both are well connected domestically, and also offer some international connections to Singapore and Kuala Lumpur.
It is possible, if one rushes oneself a bit, to visit Borobudur on a day trip from Bali or Jakarta.
By bus[edit]The public buses to Borobudur from Yogyakarta are aimed mostly at Indonesian visitors, and only a few tourists venture aboard.
If you are adventurous though, the Trans-Jogya service runs from central Yogyakarta to Jombor bus terminal in northern Yogyakarta, bus 2B/2A (Rp 3,000), where you can change to another bus to get to Borobudur.
It takes about 60–90 minutes, and should cost around Rp 10,000-20,000 one way.
If you are a tourist, the bus conductor may try to charge you more than the local rate, so if you are on a very tight budget you can negotiate a little for a better price.
The journey time is about 1 hour.
To get from or to the Hindu temples at Prambanan, take a Yogyakarta bus and get down at Jombor Terminal (90 min, Rp 15,000 for foreigners, Rp 7,000 for Indonesians).
Solo) and 1A/B from Maguwo to Prambanan.
Most of the route is on a well-maintained (for Indonesia) four-lane (in many places) highway, and there are frequent bus services (see above).
A taxi from central Yogyakarta to Borobudur costs around Rp 200,000, and from Yogyakarta airport about Rp 225,000.
By train[edit]The nearest stations are in Yogyakarta which is the major rail hub of Central Java.
Get around[edit]The only practical means of getting around Borobudur is on foot.
A toy train of limited practical use shuttles around the temple, and between the museum and entrance gate for Rp 5,000.
If you are staying in the area, most local hotels and guesthouses will rent bicycles for about Rp 30,000-50,000 per day.
To get out Be wary of the Exit signs as they lead to a maze of souvenir stalls.
See[edit][add listing]Entrance fees[edit][add listing]Entry into Borobudur costs: USD 20 / Rp 230,000 for adult non-Indonesians.
The site is open to public entrance from 6AM-5PM.
Some guides may insist on a minimum time of two hours.
You should ask for a guide in the evening before going to tour in the morning.
It is also perfectly possible to roll up and find a guide available, it all depends on how busy the site is.
In April 2011 it was announced that to assist in the ongoing preservation of the temple, future visitors would be required to view the temple in groups of no more than 30 persons and must be accompanied by Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur (TWCB) staff members.
If you do not bring your own, then one is provided free with the entrance ticket.
These are available at a post located at the bottom of the temple entrance stairs, and should be returned before leaving at an exit post.
The main site is approached through a large open and pleasant park inside the complex.
The main dome, located at the centre of the top platform, is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues seated inside perforated stupas.
If you have but modest stamina or heat tolerance, you should start as early in the day as possible, and take plenty of water with you.
A bombing some years ago destroyed nine of them, but they have been well restored.
The peak of the structure is a central stupa.
The site museum contains what might be a missing statue.
The monument's three divisions (the square terraces and central stupa at the peak are regarded as one division) symbolise the three realms of Buddhist cosmology, namely Kamadhatu (the world of desires), Rupadhatu (the world of forms) and Arupadhatu (the formless world).
These are contact with earth, giving and helping, meditation, fearlesness, teach and learn and turning the wheel of dharma.
If you want to truly understand the reliefs, it is best to employ a guide to explain the stories to you.
These are mostly hidden by the post-original construction masking at the foot of the monument.
The masking was disassembled in 1890 before being painstakingly rebuilt, and photographs were taken of the reliefs at this time.
These photographs are displayed in the Borobudur Museum.
The story then begins with the descent of the Lord Buddha from heaven, and continues until his first earthly sermon as Prince Siddhartha.
Jatakas are stories about the Buddha before he was born as Prince Siddhartha.
Avadanas are similar to jatakas, but the main figure is not Buddha himself.
Both are depicted in the same series of reliefs.
This is the story told in the final chapter of the Avatamsaka Sutra about Sudhana's tireless wandering in search of the highest perfect wisdom.
Sunrise[edit][add listing]Normally around 5h30, to best see sunrise you have to The entrance to the viewpoint is 15,000rp for locals and 30,000 for foreigners.
However, the Manohara Hotel (see Sleep) runs a daily Borobudur Sunrise Tour for Rp 320,000 for foreigners (Rp 185,000 if you are a hotel guest) and Rp 220,000 for Indonesians, which gets you a flashlight and a lift up to the temple gate at 4:30AM.
This is in time to see the sunrise, and to explore for an hour and a half before the hordes arrive.
The Borobudur Museum[edit][add listing]There are two museums located within Borobudur Archaeological Park, the Karmawibhanga Museum and the Samudraraksa Museum.
These museum ticket are already included within the Borobudur entrance ticket, so visitor are free to enter the museum.
It also displays the maritime technology and trade network of 8th century Asia and Africa, especially the maritime trade of Indian Ocean.
He surmised that these ships may have been a part of a famous shipping route — the Cinnamon Route — that linked Indonesia to Africa many centuries earlier.
The Karmawibhanga Museum displays archaeological findings around Borobudur, the restoration process, as well as the photographs of Karmawibhanga relief on the hidden foot of Borobudur.
Perhaps the most interesting exhibitions about this are those of the law of karma reliefs, with explanatory comments, and the photo gallery of late 19th-century shots of the complex before it was restored.
The museum is open daily 06:00-18:00 and entry is included with the main Borobudur ticket.
Around Borobudur[edit][add listing]Between Yogyakarta and Magelang lies the volcanic Kedu Plain.
This was clearly an important area in pre-10th century Javanese history as it contains a whole host of ruins (both Buddhist and Hindu) dating from the same era as Borobudur, and easily reached from there.
If you have a car, the most accessible of these together make an interesting use of the late part of the day on the way back to Yogyakarta after you have seen Borobudur.
Candi Mendut near BorobudurA combined ticket for entrance to both Candi Mendut and Candi Pawon costs Rp 3500.
You should be able to visit any of these in the hours of daylight.
Candi Mendut (From Borobudur head back towards Muntilan on the main road for 3 km (1.8 mi), and Candi Mendut is signposted off a small left hand turn off the main road.)
a Buddhist temple that is thought to have acted as a way-point on the road to Borobudur.
It was first discovered in 1834 and holds the distinction of being the first ancient monument in the whole of Indonesia to be restored (from 1897).
Some of the statues and reliefs here are of the highest quality, and it is well worth a visit.
editCandi Pawon.
is only 2 km (1.25 mi) from Borobudur
and you cannot miss driving past it when heading back towards Muntilan and Yogyakarta.
Both Candi Pawon and Candi Mendut are on a perfect straight line with Borobudur.
This temple was restored in the early 20th century.
is in Ngawen village just to the south of Muntilan on the main road heading towards Yogyakarta, about 15 km (9 mi) from Borobudur.
This Buddhist temple dates from 824 AD, and has some interesting wall reliefs.
editCandi Canggal (Candi Gunung Wukir).
A Mataram-era Hindu temple edit Do[edit][add listing]If you are still at Borobudur in the late afternoon, return to the top level for sunset.
Festivals[edit][add listing]On Waisak, Buddha's birthday (held on the night of the full moon in May), an elaborate and colourful multi-day Buddhist festival is held at Borobudur, culminating in a candle-lit procession from Candi Mendut to Borobudur.
If you are lucky enough to be visiting at this time, the procession is magical event to witness.
Identifying genuine lava stone is easy enough as the stone is quite light for its size compared to the weightier concrete.
Nonetheless, if a concrete Buddha head will suffice you should not pay more than Rp 20,000.
Their first offer is around Rp 150,000.
Just tell them, that you already bought for Rp 20,000 and they will give you this price.
An authentic lava stone version carved by a skilled craftsman will cost, and be worth, considerably more.
Muntilan[edit][add listing]Muntilan is a market town on the main route from Yogyakarta to Magelang.
When leaving Borobudure, Muntilan is 13–14 km (8.5 mi) back towards Yogyakarta on the main road (Jalan Magelang).
It is also where transport for Borobudur turns off the main road, and it has developed as a leading manufacturing centre of carved stone Borobudur replicas.
As a typical market town in Central Java, it is worth walking along the main street to have a sense of where tourism has not taken over completely, as most tourists rush through, a significant number of adjacent villages and areas treat this as their market town, and it is possible to see the businesses and people who rely on Javanese custom, rather than tourist.
In most cases though, the food stores will still provide tourist food, rather than what the local eats, you would need a javanese or Indonesian friend or guide to specify you want to eat local.
Muntilan is also a significant roman catholic heritage site, being the location of the Van Lith mission in the nineteenth century, it is also the place where senior members of the Jesuits who served in Yogyakarta and Central Java are buried.
If you are thinking of buying a stone Buddha, stupa or wall relief, this could be your port of call.
Manohara Restaurant, inside the grounds of the hotel of the same name, serves up standard Indonesian fare while offering beautiful views of Borobudur.
Mains from about Rp 25,000.
It is though well worth spending the night at Borobudur as this will give you a chance the following morning to get to the temples before the crowds arrive.
Budget[edit][add listing]There are a few losmen (guesthouses) and basic hotels in the village of Borobudur just south of the park entrance.
Check-out: 12:00.
Lotus I is just 100 m from the entrance of Borobudur, and the late checkout is perfect for spending the morning at the temple.
Good, cheap Indonesian food available until 21:00.
Organizes tours for Hill sunrise view on Borobudur (Rp 130,000) and offers a 15% discount on the temple entrance fee.
editPondok Tinggal, Jl Balaputradewa 32, Brojonalan (on the eastern road entry, between Borobudur and Candi Pawon), ☎
+62 293 788145, e-mail: info@pondoktingal.com.
Good value option less than 1 km from the entrance to Borobudur.
From Rp 200,000.
editRajasa Hotel, Jl Badrawati No2, ☎
+62 293 788276.
Only about 200 m from the main entrance.
Good service and food for the price.
From about Rp 300,000. editMid-range[edit][add listing]Manohara
Hotel, Jl Badrawati, ☎ +62 293 788680, e-mail:
manohara@borobudurpark.co.id.
Formerly Taman Borobudur Guest House, this friendly resort-style hotel is located inside the Borobudur Park, run by the park authority, and is 200 m from the temple entrance.
The grounds are beautifully landscaped and the views are great, but the rooms are little more than functional with air conditioning, hot water and passable bathrooms.
Still, a room booked here is only Rp 690,000 (more during holidays), which is excellent value as the price includes breakfast and standard entry to Borobudur for two.
Food is excellent.
From Rp 625,000. editNing Tidar Hotel, Jl Purworejo-Magelang KM 5, Magelang (about 6 km (3.7 mi) from Borobudur), ☎ +62 293 314316, e-mail: info@ningtidar.com.
Rooms from US $100.
editSplurge[edit][add listing]Amanjiwo (3 km (1.7 mi) from Borobudur on the temple's south side), ☎ +62 293 78833, e-mail: amanjiwo@amanresorts.com.
From US $650. editPlataran Borobudur (Plataran Borobudur Resort and Spa in Borobudur), Dusun Tanjungan, Borobudur, Magelang, Central Java 56553, Indonesia (1.5 km from Borobudur area (You can reach the temple area in less then 5 minutes)), ☎
+62 293 788 888, fax:
+62 293 788 699, e-mail: info@plataranborobudur.com.
From US $137.
Seriously.
There is a lot written in travel guides about the pushy nature of the vendors at Borobudur.
And they can be a little annoying it must be said.
But a few friendly no's and keeping on walking usually does the job.
Yogyakarta is a student town with many colleges and Universities, and you will often find many students at Borobudur who are keen to be friendly with you.
Alternatively, visit as early as you can in the morning.
If you look vaguely Western, you'll be a bigger tourist attraction to school students than the monument itself.
Police: ☎ 110.
Go next[edit]The Hindu temples of Prambanan, about an hour away by car, make the perfect complement to Borobudur.
The cultural splendour of Yogyakarta is about 90 minutes by bus.
If you want to see a serious active volcano, Mount Merapi is about a 2 hour drive to the east.
However if you are based in Yogyakarta or other locations and not driving yourself , there are 'tours' or 'climbing' ventures, that in most cases leave from Yogyakarta, and drive to Selo (located in the valley between Merbabu and Merapi) which is a traditional location to walk to the top of Merapi in the middle of the night for the dawn views.
