16 JUNE, 2014 - 12:26 DHWTYThe magnificent ancient Buddhist Temple of Borobudur(Read the article on one page)Indonesia is the country with the largest Muslim population in the world.
The Borobudur Temple Compound consists of three monuments, namely the Temple of Borobudur and two smaller temples located on the east on a straight axis to the main temple.
The main temple of Borobudur itself is the largest Buddhist temple in the world.
This is followed by the trunk of a cone with three platforms.
The walls and balustrades of Borobudur are decorated with fine low reliefs depicting various Buddhist scenes.
This temple was built as a Mahayana Buddhist temple around the8th and 9 th century A.D. by the Sailendra dynasty.
This may be due to the fact that the arrival of Islam on Java during the 13 th and 14 th centuries A.D. shifted the centre of Javan life to the eastern part of the island.
Hence, an excavation was organised to uncover the temple.
By exposing the temple to the elements, the temple began to deteriorate further.
Furthermore, stones were casually removed by villagers to be used as building materials, while Buddha heads and other treasures were removed by collectors to be sold to private and public collections around the world.
As a result, the preservation of this cultural heritage became a central priority of the government.
In addition, the relief panels were also cleaned and treated to withstand the elements.
Eight years and $25 million later, the restoration of Borobudur was finally completed.
Nevertheless, conservation of this temple has to be continued over the years.
For instance, just several months ago, Borobudur was threatened by the eruption of Mount Kelud.
In order to protect the temple, some of the stupas were quickly covered in order to protect them from the volcanic ash.
The fact that this incredible Buddhist monument continues to be treasured and protected in a predominantly Muslim country, is testament to its significant value as a cultural and historical icon of Indonesia.
Source: Big StockPhoto.
[Online] Available at: Globe, 2014.
Borobudur, Other Sites, Closed After Mount Kelud Eruption.
[Online] Available at: Planet, 2014.
Introducing Borobudur.
[Online] Available at: Geographic Travel, 2014.
[Online] Available at: of the World, 2014. ...
saving Borobudur.
