8th and 9th century Buddhist sculptures Artist: Unknown Country: Indonesia Province: Central Java Date: 8th and 9th century Medium: Stone Provenance: United Nations Educational,Scientific and Cultural Organization IntroductionThe sitting Buddha in the chamber is one of the many Buddhist statues in the Borobudur Temple Compounds.
The Borobudur Temple Compounds is a ninth-century Mahayana Buddhist monument.
It has 2,672 relief panels that are decorated and a total of 504 Buddhist statues.
At the center of the top platform is where the main dome is located encompassed by 72 Buddhist statues.
The Borobudur Temple Compounds were abandoned as a result of the decline of Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms in Java.
Descriptive Analysis The Borobudur Temple Compounds is a large site with many Buddhist statues.
The one featured in the picture is just one of many.
It was made of stone like the rest of the site is.
The Buddhist statue is seated inside of a circular platform.
Each stone has a hole in the top of each.
Three fingers are sticking up on one hand.
The only thing that looks like it is not proportional is the ears.
The body of the Buddhist statue has no definition to it.
It is only known where the elbows are because the arms are bent.
The stone of the Buddhist statue is in good condition.
There is some discoloration throughout the stone though.
Behind the statue the viewer sees large objects made of stone; more part of the temple.
This part of the temple looks rougher.
It appears as though there may have been more damage and erosion here compared to the Buddhist statue.
Formal and Contextual Analysis This Buddhist statue as well as the entirety of the Borobudur temple compounds was used as a place of worship for Buddhists on pilgrimages.
There are three tiers of the compounds which are meant to symbolize the three stages of Buddhist cosmology (Kamadhatu- world of desire, Rupadhatu- the world of forms, Arupadhatu- the world of formlessness).
This is important in determining the importance of this particular statue which is located right before the top of the temple which represents the world of formlessness or Arupadhatu.
It is the immaterial realm of the spirit, which is said to be free from the limitations of matter and from all thought of matter.”
This definition gives a deeper insight to the context in which the Buddha is displayed.
These are simply hand gestures that carry a universal iconography throughout the Buddhist faith.
The statue found at the Borobudur temple compounds mudra is known as the Gesture of Turning the Wheel of Dharma.
This has a few different meanings within it; “the thumb and index finger of the right hand stand for wisdom and method combined, the other three raised fingers symbolize the teaching of the Buddhist doctrine, which leads sentient or consciousness beings to the paths of the beings of three capacities (enlightened beings).
The position of the left hand symbolizes the beings of the three capacities, which follow the combined path of method and wisdom.”
The mudra and the placement of the Buddha right before the top which is used to represent the world of formlessness conveys a direct message to the Buddhist on his pilgrimage.
It tells whoever is on their pilgrimage that through the wisdom and method of the Buddhist faith it is possible for them to become a being of three capacities and free themselves of thought.
Since the Buddhist faith calls for Buddhists to leave all worldly attachments behind and become a “wander” which implies a somewhat lonely lifestyle, the statue would serve as a positive reminder to the Buddhist on their pilgrimage as to what they are striving for.
The Buddha’s seated position is a common one and many look similar to this one with its eyes closed.
SourcesPrintedDohanian, D.K. "Faith and Power in Japanese Buddhist Art, 1600-2005.
(Brief article)(Book review).
Gale.
Eastern Michigan University.
16 Mar. 2009 Ghori, Ahmer K., and Kevin C. Chung.
"Interpretation of Hand Signs in Buddhist Art.
(Author abstract). "
Journal of Hand Surgery (American Volume) 32.6 (July-August 2007): 918(5).
Academic One File.
Gale.
Eastern Michigan University.
16 Mar. Kuhlman, James R. "Leidy, Denise Patry.
(Brief article)(Book review). "
Gale.
Eastern Michigan University.
Academic One File.
