Borobudur is a Buddhist stupa and temple complex in Central Java, Indonesia dating from the 8th century, and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
It was likely founded as a religious site in the 8th century at the peak of the Sailendra dynasty in central Java.
Borobudur and the nearby Hindu Prambanan temple complex were more or less contemporaneous.
As well as being the single most popular tourist attraction in modern day Indonesia, Borobudur has resumed its role as an important place of worship and pilgrimage for Indonesian Buddhists.
If you are adventurous though, the Trans-Jogya service runs from central Yogyakarta to Jombor bus terminal in northern Yogyakarta, bus 2B/2A (Rp 3,000), where you can change to another bus to get to Borobudur.
It takes about 60–90 minutes, and should cost around Rp 10,000-20,000 one way.
If you are a tourist, the bus conductor may try to charge you more than the local rate, so if you are on a very tight budget you can negotiate a little for a better price.
To get from or to the Hindu temples at Prambanan, take a Yogyakarta bus and get down at Jombor Terminal (90 min, Rp 15,000 for foreigners, Rp 7,000 for Indonesians).
A taxi from central Yogyakarta to Borobudur costs around Rp 200,000, and from Yogyakarta airport about Rp 225,000.
To get out Be wary of the Exit signs as they lead to a maze of souvenir stalls.
The site is open to public entrance from 6AM-5PM.
You should ask for a guide in the evening before going to tour in the morning.
If you do not bring your own, then one is provided free with the entrance ticket.
If you have but modest stamina or heat tolerance, you should start as early in the day as possible, and take plenty of water with you.
If you want to truly understand the reliefs, it is best to employ a guide to explain the stories to you.
The masking was disassembled in 1890 before being painstakingly rebuilt, and photographs were taken of the reliefs at this time.
Sunrise[edit][add listing]Normally around 5h30, to best see sunrise you have to The entrance to the viewpoint is 15,000rp for locals and 30,000 for foreigners.
However, the Manohara Hotel (see Sleep) runs a daily Borobudur Sunrise Tour for Rp 320,000 for foreigners (Rp 185,000 if you are a hotel guest) and Rp 220,000 for Indonesians, which gets you a flashlight and a lift up to the temple gate at 4:30AM.
This is in time to see the sunrise, and to explore for an hour and a half before the hordes arrive.
The Borobudur Museum[edit][add listing]There are two museums located within Borobudur Archaeological Park, the Karmawibhanga Museum and the Samudraraksa Museum.
The museum is open daily 06:00-18:00 and entry is included with the main Borobudur ticket.
Around Borobudur[edit][add listing]Between Yogyakarta and Magelang lies the volcanic Kedu Plain.
If you have a car, the most accessible of these together make an interesting use of the late part of the day on the way back to Yogyakarta after you have seen Borobudur.
Candi Mendut (From Borobudur head back towards Muntilan on the main road for 3 km (1.8 mi), and Candi Mendut is signposted off a small left hand turn off the main road.)
Some of the statues and reliefs here are of the highest quality, and it is well worth a visit.
is in Ngawen village just to the south of Muntilan on the main road heading towards Yogyakarta, about 15 km (9 mi) from Borobudur.
This Buddhist temple dates from 824 AD, and has some interesting wall reliefs.
A Mataram-era Hindu temple edit Do[edit][add listing]If you are still at Borobudur in the late afternoon, return to the top level for sunset.
Their first offer is around Rp 150,000.
Just tell them, that you already bought for Rp 20,000 and they will give you this price.
Muntilan[edit][add listing]Muntilan is a market town on the main route from Yogyakarta to Magelang.
It is also where transport for Borobudur turns off the main road, and it has developed as a leading manufacturing centre of carved stone Borobudur replicas.
Mains from about Rp 25,000.
Budget[edit][add listing]There are a few losmen (guesthouses) and basic hotels in the village of Borobudur just south of the park entrance.
Only about 200 m from the main entrance.
Good service and food for the price.
Formerly Taman Borobudur Guest House, this friendly resort-style hotel is located inside the Borobudur Park, run by the park authority, and is 200 m from the temple entrance.
Still, a room booked here is only Rp 690,000 (more during holidays), which is excellent value as the price includes breakfast and standard entry to Borobudur for two.
editSplurge[edit][add listing]Amanjiwo (3 km (1.7 mi) from Borobudur on the temple's south side), ☎
+62 293 78833, e-mail: amanjiwo@amanresorts.com.
Alternatively, visit as early as you can in the morning.
If you want to see a serious active volcano, Mount Merapi is about a 2 hour drive to the east.
However if you are based in Yogyakarta or other locations and not driving yourself , there are 'tours' or 'climbing' ventures, that in most cases leave from Yogyakarta, and drive to Selo (located in the valley between Merbabu and Merapi) which is a traditional location to walk to the top of Merapi in the middle of the night for the dawn views.
