Forensic scientists have complained that the scientific analyses used for testing in CSI shows are partly nonexistent and deliver a picture of forensic work that is too glamorous, streamlined and racy (Cole & Dioso-Villa, 2007).
Particular concerns revolve around the fear that jurors' expectations about forensic science and police procedures are shaped by portrayals in fictional crime shows and that this affects the rights of defendants and crime victims (Tyler, 2006).
Significantly, there is no objective evidence for the claim that viewing crime shows like CSI has a negative impact on jury verdicts (Tyler, 2006).
CSI effects on criminal justice procedures Much recent debate in Australia in the wake of reversals of a number of jury verdicts has centred on jury responses to DNA profiling evidence.
CSI effects on judges, lawyers and forensic scientistsA number of surveys have confirmed that lawyers, judges and forensic scientists endorse the existence of CSI effects.
For example, the majority of judges, prosecutors and defence attorneys in a US-based survey agreed that jurors have unreasonable expectations of forensic science such as DNA profiling evidence and a limited ability to assess its validity (Robbers, 2008).
A survey of Australian forensic scientists (n=69) revealed that all believed that forensic television programs exerted some negative effect on public perceptions of forensic science (Hanson, 2009).
CSI effects on jurors Among the potential CSI effects identified, the majority of scholarly, legal and media debates have focused on suggestions that frequent exposure to television crime shows has (a) increased juror expectations of forensic scientific evidence, and (b) unduly increased juror trust in forensic scientific evidence, weakening the defence case (Schweitzer & Saks, 2007).
Unrealistic expectancies of forensic evidence In a US study, CSI viewers expected more forensic scientific evidence in cases than did non-viewers (Shelton, Kim, & Barak, 2006).
Misplaced trust in science Findings in a US trial simulation revealed that mock jurors who were frequent crime show viewers were more sceptical of evidence involving matching hair samples than were non-viewers (Schweitzer & Saks, 2007).
Post-trial interviews with Australian jurors in actual criminal cases involving DNA profiling demonstrated jurors' susceptibility to the ‘white coat effect', which resulted in jurors placing too much confidence in, and weight on, this expert evidence (Findlay, 2008; Wheate, 2010).
A survey of 3,600 Australian jury eligible citizens further explored the relationship between CSI exposure and attitudes to forensic scientific expert evidence.
Results confirmed that frequent CSI viewers placed more trust in forensic science and DNA evidence and were more motivated to serve as jurors than infrequent viewers (Goodman-Delahunty & Hewson, 2010).
No impact on verdict Findings published in the US and Australia have confirmed that CSI viewers believed they had a greater understanding of forensic evidence, expressed more confidence in their verdicts and were more sceptical about forensic scientific tests.
The convergent evidence is that CSI viewing does not predict jury verdicts (Cole & Dioso-Villa, 2007; Goodman-Delahunty & Hewson, 2010; Podlas, 2006; Schweitzer & Saks, 2007).
Jurors' capacity to distinguish fantasy from reality Juror susceptibility to media portrayals of forensic science can not be presumed following CSI exposure.
Superficial analyses of the relationship between CSI viewing and jurors' decisions underestimate the ability of the average juror to distinguish fantasy from reality (Podlas, 2006).
In a realistic trial simulation directly testing the persuasive force of CSI-style forensic evidence, 150 jury eligible New South Wales citizens were not unduly persuaded by the sophisticated technological depictions presented by forensic experts (Goodman-Delahunty, Rossner & Tait, 2010).
Until evidence emerges that jurors' verdicts are distorted by frequent CSI viewing, there is no reason to modify court procedures or to dispense with juries in criminal cases involving forensic scientific evidence or a lack of it.
CSI and its effects: media, juries, and the burden of proof.
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice, 36, 15-53.
Goodman-Delahunty, J, Rossner, M, & Tait, D (2010, in press).
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences, 38, 97-106.
Framing the forensic field in the wake of CSI: a survey of the attitudes of Australian forensic professionals towards the ‘CSI effect'.
Blinded by science: The social construction of reality in forensic television shows and its effect on criminal jury trials.
A study of juror expectations and demands concerning scientific evidence: Does the "CSI effect" exist?
The importance of DNA evidence to juries in criminal trials.
