In apparent fascination with our criminal justice process, many of today's courtroom dramas are based on actual cases.
The most popular courtroom dramas—whether actual, edited, or purely fictional—focus on the use of new science and technology in solving crimes.
Not only is CSI so popular that it has spawned other versions that dominate the traditional television ratings, it has also prompted similar forensic dramas, such as Cold Case, Bones, and Numb3rs.
As one district attorney put it, "Jurors now expect us to have a DNA test for just about every case.
Our goal was to determine if there was any empirical evidence behind the commonly held beliefs that juror expectations for forensic evidence—and their demand for it as a condition for conviction—are linked to watching law-related television shows.
First, we obtained demographic information and asked the prospective jurors about their television-viewing habits, including the programs they watched, how often, and how "real" they thought the programs were.
With respect to each of these categories of crimes, we then asked what types of evidence the prospective jurors expected to see:Eyewitness testimony from the alleged victim.
Then, we got to the heart of the matter: not only did we want to explore jury expectations regarding scientific evidence, we also wanted to discover whether the prospective jurors would demand to see scientific evidence before they would find a defendant guilty.
We asked the survey participants how likely they would be to find a defendant guilty or not guilty based on certain types of evidence presented by the prosecution and the defense.
Juror Expectations for Forensic Evidence Did the survey respondents expect the prosecution to present some kind of scientific evidence?
Our survey indicated that:46 percent expected to see some kind of scientific evidence in every criminal case.
22 percent expected to see DNA evidence in every criminal case.
36 percent expected to see fingerprint evidence in every criminal case.
32 percent expected to see ballistic or other firearms laboratory evidence in every criminal case.
The findings also suggested that the jurors' expectations were not just blanket expectations for scientific evidence.
For example, a higher percentage of respondents expected to see DNA evidence in the more serious violent offenses, such as murder or attempted murder (46 percent) and rape (73 percent), than in other types of crimes.
Our findings also indicated that a higher percentage wanted to see fingerprint evidence in breaking and entering cases (71 percent), any theft case (59 percent), and in crimes involving a gun (66 percent).
.It was not a surprise that Law & Order and CSI were the two most frequently watched law-related television programs (45 percent and 42 percent, respectively, of the surveyed jurors).
What role, then, did watching CSI play in the respondents' expectations and demands for forensic evidence?
But, it is possible that the CSI viewers may have been better informed jurors than the non-CSI viewers.
The CSI viewers had higher expectations about scientific evidence that was more likely to be relevant to a particular crime than did the non-CSI viewers.
The CSI viewers also had lower expectations about evidence that was less likely to be relevant to a particular crime than did the non-CSI viewers.
Although our study revealed that the prospective jurors had high expectations for scientific evidence, the more important question, I believe, is whether those expectations were more likely to result in an acquittal if they were not met.
Interestingly, in most of the scenarios presented, potential jurors' increased expectations of scientific evidence did not translate into a demand for this type of evidence as a prerequisite for finding someone guilty.
Based on our findings, jurors were more likely to find a defendant guilty than not guilty even without scientific evidence if the victim or other witnesses testified, except in the case of rape.
[1] On the other hand, if the prosecutor relied on circumstantial evidence, the prospective jurors said they would demand some kind of scientific evidence before they would return a guilty verdict.
It's Not CSI!
Here are some of our findings:In the "every crime" scenario, CSI viewers were more likely to convict without scientific evidence if eyewitness testimony was available.
In rape cases, CSI viewers were less likely to convict if DNA evidence was not presented.
In both the breaking-and-entering and theft scenarios, CSI viewers were more likely to convict if there was victim or other testimony, but no fingerprint evidence.
At the same time, new technology has created a revolution in information availability and transmission.
The Internet is an obvious example, and, in many ways, it has been the catalyst for this ongoing revolution.
When a scientific test is available that would produce evidence of guilt or innocence—but the prosecution chooses not to perform that test and present its results to the jury—it may be reasonable for a jury to doubt the strength of the government's case.
Most importantly, prosecutors, defense lawyers, and judges should understand, anticipate, and address the fact that jurors enter the courtroom with a lot of information about the criminal justice system and the availability of scientific evidence.
259, March 2008NCJ 221501 About the Author Donald Shelton has been a felony trial judge in Ann Arbor, Michigan, for 17 years.
He has written extensively on the impact of technology on the law and the right to a trial by jury.
Notes[1]
Only 14 percent of respondents said that they would find a defendant guilty in a rape case if the victim's testimony was presented without any scientific evidence; 26 percent answered that they would find the defendant not guilty without scientific evidence.
