The practice of interposition—public opinion, protests, petitions, and legitimate actions of state legislatures—focused attention on whether the government was acting in conformity with the Constitution.
They also raised key questions of constitutionalism: Who were “the people” that underlay the national constitution, and how could that sovereign act and be recognized in action?
Madison’s Theory of Interposition The right to monitor the constitutional operation of government was a central issue of American constitutionalism after the adoption of the Constitution in 1787.
The struggle over that right revealed a fundamental disagreement among Americans over the puzzle at the heart of the new federal system: What did rule by a collective sovereign mean under a national constitution when the people who held this sovereignty were also the sovereign of their individual state governments?
This interposition was not a sovereign act, since the people as the collective sovereign did not take that step.
Rather, the interposer, through public opinion, protests, petitions, or even the state legislatures acting as an instrument of the people, focused attention on whether the government was acting in conformity with the people’s mandates as expressed in their constitutions.
Virginia’s legislature sent copies to every other state legislature “requesting their cooperation in similar instructions to their respective Senators” in order to alter a practice inconsistent with a national government based on a sovereign people who had a right to scrutinize the workings of their government.
The Sedition Act threatened the Republicans’ use of newspapers to counter their Federalist opponents.
Republicans asserted that the Alien Act exceeded Congress’s constitutional powers, while the Sedition Act violated the First Amendment.
The Virginia Resolutions called the acts “unconstitutional,” while the Kentucky Resolutions described them as “not law but utterly void and of no force.”
[13] Those words, Madison later explained, simply emphasized the legislature’s opinion of the acts; they were not a nullification of the acts.
The resolutions, as Madison pointed out, did not “annul the acts” because they came “from the Legislature only, which was not even a party to the Constitution.”
[14] Only collective action by the people as the sovereign source of the Constitution could nullify the acts.
When the Kentucky legislature convened in early November 1798, Governor James Garrard urged legislators to assess “the conduct of the national government” and offer it appropriate “applau[se]” or “censure.”
The legislature should declare the state’s support for the Constitution and “protest against all unconstitutional laws and impolitic proceedings.”
[15] Indeed, Kentucky’s 1798 Resolutions asked its “Co-states” to declare the acts “void and of no force.”
[16]On the other hand, Virginia’s Resolutions identified “the states” as the “parties” to the Constitution who could “interpose” to stop unconstitutional acts.
[17] The resolutions were an interposition by each state legislature offering its constitutional opinion.
This was “especially” true, noted Madison, since the people in “a Convention was the organ by which the Compact was made.”
[19]Both states’ resolutions acknowledged the ultimate authority of the people as the sovereign to assess the constitutionality of the government’s acts.
Legislative interposition sought the repeal of unconstitutional laws by focusing attention on them.
Ensuring the constitutional operation of government was the responsibility of individual citizens in addition to their state legislators.
[21]Protests against the Alien and Sedition Acts preceding the resolutions in Virginia and Kentucky emphasized the duty of citizens to identify overreaching acts of government.
Kentucky’s legislature asserted that “the several states” (and by implication the people of “the several states”), as the sovereign source of the Federal Constitution, had the “unquestionable right” to judge infractions of that Constitution and “that a nullification by those sovereignties of all unauthorized acts done under color of that instrument, is the rightful remedy.”
Such a step could be exercised by the whole people as the sovereign who created that Constitution.
On the other hand, Kentucky’s legislative protest against the Alien and Sedition Acts was a “SOLEMN PROTEST” intended to attract attention and bring corrective action.
He insisted that states had a “right to interpose a legislative declaration of opinion on a constitutional point.”
Published in 1800, Madison’s Report justified the resolutions as legitimate and appropriate interposition to monitor the Constitution.
In addition to state legislatures, “private citizens” could interpose to object to acts of the government that they believed were unwarranted by the Constitution.
[31]The interposition by Virginia’s legislature did not preclude the sovereign—being the people of the states that included, but was not limited to, those in Virginia—from using other “farther measures that might become necessary and proper.”
[32] Among the “farther measures” for responding to unconstitutional laws was the sovereign’s right to dictate a final constitutional solution.
As Madison observed, “The authority of constitutions over governments, and of the sovereignty of the people over constitutions” meant that a sovereign people held greater authority than the governments they established.
For many Americans, as for Madison, this was “a plain principle, founded in common sense, illustrated by common practice, and essential to the nature of compacts.”
Because “resort can be had to no tribunal superior to the authority of the parties, the parties themselves must be the rightful judges in the last resort, whether the bargain made, has been…violated.”
[36]According to Madison, an “interposition of the parties, in their sovereign capacity” was justified only when unconstitutional acts of government “deeply and essentially affect[ed]
the vital principles of their political system.”
This final resolution of the Constitution by the people should not occur “in a hasty manner, or on doubtful…occasions.”
[37] The Virginia Resolutions referred to a right and duty of the people of the states “to interpose” collectively in cases of the national government’s “deliberate, palpable and dangerous exercise” of powers not granted to it by the Constitution.
Madison later conceded that the resolutions and his Report lacked specifics about “what mode the States could interpose in their collective character as parties to the Constitution.”
However, given “the object and reasoning” of those documents, specifics were “not necessary.”
“It was sufficient to show that the authority to interpose existed, and was a resort beyond that of the Supreme Court of the United States.”
If the sovereign people invoked their ultimate right to intervene, how they did so was their “own choice.”
[39]Historians often consider the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions a failure because no other state issued similar resolutions.
South Carolina sent a large delegation reflecting the state’s view that the tariff was “unconstitutional.”
[41] Many other states, northern as well as southern, also attended the convention.
South Carolina’s legislature did its “duty” in bringing attention to the tariff’s “unequal and unconstitutional burden.”
Meeting with “other States” at the Philadelphia Free Trade Convention was South Carolina’s “last effort at redress.”
For tariff opponents, the convention’s failure made other steps necessary.
[44]The theory justifying the single state veto came from the pen of South Carolina’s John C. Calhoun.
Like Madison’s Report of 1800 for Virginia’s legislature, South Carolina’s Exposition focused attention on the power of the national government.
Calhoun found just such proof for his theory in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions and Madison’s Report of 1800.
He cast the state veto as an interposition as equally justified as the interposition taken by Virginia’s and Kentucky’s legislatures in 1798.
For purposes of the national government, all agreed that the people were the sovereign, but how could they exercise their sovereignty?
Proponents of the state veto, such as Calhoun, argued that the sovereign for purposes of the Federal Constitution was the people in each individual state.
As he explained, the Constitution, “when formed, was submitted for ratification to the people of the several States; it was ratified by them as States, each State for itself; each by its ratification binding its own citizens.”
Although each state independently bound itself to the Union, that did not mean that it lost its independence.
The people were the sovereign who created the independent states, but it was these independent states that were the sovereign of the national government.
Calhoun thought it insignificant that the Constitution’s Preamble declared that it was “ordained by the people of the United States.”
Those words, for Calhoun, did not make a national people rather than the individual states the sovereign. ’”
This made the conclusion…inevitable, that the Constitution is the work of the people of the States, considered, as separate and independent political communities—that they are its authors—their power created it—their voice clothed it with an authority—that the Government it formed is in reality their agent—and that the Union, of which it is the bond, is an Union of States, and not of individuals.
By allowing each state a veto, argued Webster, nullification simply represented “revolution or rebellion”; it could never amount to “constitutional resistance.”
[53]As Webster’s position illustrated, one’s understanding of the nature of the federal union was shaped by how one described the sovereign that created the Constitution.
Both Calhoun and Webster thought that only one of two options was possible: America had either “a consolidated Government” or “a confederated Government.”
[54]Madison and the Sovereignty of the People in the States Madison explained that the Constitution created neither.
Individual states were not the sovereign of the national government.
That Report explained and justified the interposition by the Virginia and Kentucky legislatures but did not suggest that the people of a single state could constitutionally veto a national law.
Madison’s use of the plural—that it was the people of the states who were a collective sovereign—crucially distinguished his views from Calhoun’s concept of a confederation of states, with each individual state a sovereign party to the Constitution.
Calhoun assumed that when Madison’s Report and the Virginia Resolutions referred to the powers of the sovereign who created the Constitution, Madison meant powers exercised by the people within a single state.
[61] Calhoun’s theory asserted that each state was a sovereign of the national government and thus could act authoritatively and independently of the others and veto unconstitutional laws.
Calhoun used Madison’s description that the collective people of all the states were the sovereign to justify a single state’s veto.
For Madison, in using the third meaning of “the states,” the Constitution was a “compact” reflecting an agreement by the people of the individual states acting not as the sovereign of their own states, but rather in concert with the people of other states as the collective sovereign of the national government they were creating.
The people of the nation—while still identified in terms of the individual states in which they acted—was a different sovereign collectively from the people acting as sovereigns of their respective states.
This collective sovereign was the sovereign that created the Constitution, and only a majority of that collective sovereign could alter or abolish the Constitution outside of its “purview and forms.”
[63]Madison’s terminology demonstrated that describing the Constitution as a compact did not demand an acceptance of individual state governments or the sovereign people of individual states as the parties who created the Constitution.
The Collective Sovereignty of the People
The fact that the Constitution provided means for resolving constitutional questions, however, did not and could not preclude the people collectively as the sovereign from deciding a constitutional issue for themselves.
It remained up to the people as the collective sovereign whether to resolve matters by exercising their final or, as Madison put it, “ultimate” authority, which could also be exercised outside the “purview and forms” of the Constitution.
[66]Thus, Madison distinguished the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions from South Carolina’s “nullifying process.”
South Carolina, Madison noted, did not distinguish the constitutional “right of the parties to the Constitution” to nullify national laws from the ability of “a single party” to withdraw from the Union in the face of oppression as an act of revolution.
“[T]he plural term States,” Madison noted of his Report of 1800, “was invariably used in reference” to actions taken by states and not by a single state.
[67]This constitutional authority of the collective sovereign that had created the Constitution was obviously not available to an individual state and hence could not justify an individual state’s veto.
[68]Madison described both the Supreme Court and the sovereign people as having ultimate authority regarding the Constitution’s meaning in “the last resort.”
[69] This need not be a contradiction.
However, if the people acted outside the Constitution’s forms and exercised their power as the collective sovereign, the judiciary’s determinations could not prevail.
They did not rely on “what are called our natural rights, or the right of revolution,” but insisted they were acting under “a CONSTITUTIONAL right.”
[71]Under Madison’s view of constitutionalism, had the people of South Carolina acted with the people of the other states rather than as an individual state, their collective nullification would have been an act of the sovereign that created the national Constitution.
Only when the people of a given state acted in combination with the sovereign people of other states could there be a legitimate claim of the ultimate sovereign authority of “the people.”
As unilateral defiance by one state, South Carolina’s nullification presented the prospect of disunion.
He issued a nullification proclamation that, while acknowledging the people’s “indefeasible right of resisting acts which are plainly unconstitutional and too oppressive to be endured,”[72] declared that South Carolina had taken “the strange position” that a single state could “declare an act of Congress void” and “prohibit its execution.”
[73] This was “incompatible with the existence of the Union” and “destructive” of the Constitution because the Union was not a “compact between sovereign States.”
[74] Jackson concluded, as did Webster, that a national American people as the sovereign had formed the national government.
Nonetheless, Madison agreed with Jackson that nullification through a single state’s veto, like secession, was a “revolutionary act,” not a constitutional right.
This was distinctly different, as Madison argued, from an individual state deciding on its own to nullify a national law—constituting a revolutionary act.
Madison distinguished carefully between interposition—groups of citizens or state legislatures identifying unconstitutional laws—and any effort by individual states to nullify such laws.
He considered the people of the states the ultimate judge of the constitutionality of acts of the government.
While interposition could be used to express a view on the constitutionality of a law, it did not preclude the role of the Supreme Court as interpreter of the Constitution.
