James Bowie James Bowie April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836 (aged 39)Nickname Jim Bowie Place of birth Logan County, Kentucky (USA)Place of death the Alamo, San Antonio, Republic of Texas Allegiance United States of America Republic of Texas Service/branch Republic of Texas Militia Years of service 1835, 1836 Rank ColonelUnit Garrison of the Alamo Commands held the Alamo, San Antonio Battles/wars siege of the Alamo James "Jim" Bowie (April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836) was a nineteenth century American pioneer and soldier who took a prominent part in the Texas Revolution and was killed at the Battle of the Alamo.
Bowie is also known for the style of knife he carried, which came to be known as the "Bowie knife. "
He was born in Kentucky and spent most of his life in Louisiana.
Bowie worked as a land speculator for several years, but many of his land deals were fraudulent, based on forged titles.
He gained fame in 1827 when he participated in the Sandbar Fight and killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife.
Newspapers printed the story of the fight, and within the next few years Bowie's fame, and that of his knife, spread around the world.
In 1830, Bowie moved to Texas, where he became a Mexican citizen and married the daughter of the then-vice governor of the province.
Bowie was often away from home in the early years of his marriage, and spent several months looking for the lost Los Almagres Mine.
The Bowies moved a great deal, first settling in Georgia, where they had six children, and then moving to Kentucky.
In 1800, Rezin Bowie sold his property and the family spent two years in Missouri.
They moved to Spanish Louisiana in 1802 when he was six[1] settling on the Bushley Bayou in Rapides Parish.
[2] [3]The Bowie family moved again in 1809, settling on Bayou Teche in Louisiana.
They found a permanent home in Opelousas Parish in 1812.
[5] The children were also taught how to survive on the frontier.
Bowie became proficient with a pistol, rifle, and knife.
[6] Bowie had a reputation for fearlessness, and as a boy one of his Indian friends taught him how to rope alligators.
[3] [9] In June 1819, Bowie joined the Long expedition.
Led by Dr. James Long, the expedition of 75 men wished to free Texas from Spanish oversight.
The depth of Bowie's participation is unclear, but the invasion eventually collapsed.
[12]Land speculator Shortly before Bowie's father died in 1818 or 1819 he gifted Bowie and his brother Rezin each ten servants, horses, and cattle.
[9] Louisiana was gaining population rapidly, and the brothers wished to take advantage of rising land prices by speculating in land but did not have the capital required to buy large tracts of land.
He would buy smuggled slaves from Lafitte, then bring the slaves directly to a customhouse and inform on himself.
The customs officers would put the slaves up for auction, and Bowie would buy them back.
[15] [16]In 1825, the two brothers joined with their younger brother Stephen to buy Acadia, a plantation near Alexandria.
The plantation became known as a "model estate," but on February 12, 1831 they sold it and 65 slaves for $90,000.
[9]Bowie and his brother John were involved in a large court case in the late 1820s over their land speculation in Louisiana.
When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803, the country had promised to honor all former land grant claims, and, for the next 20 years, tried to determine who owned what land.
The Arkansas Superior Court received 126 claims in late 1827 from Arkansas residents who claimed to have purchased land in former Spanish grants from the Bowies.
[20]Bowie KnifeA Bowie knife.
Bowie's fame came about as a result of a feud with Norris Wright, the sheriff of Rapides Parish.
Bowie had support Wright's opponent in the race for sheriff, and Wright, a bank director, had been instrumental in turning down Bowie's loan application.
An uninjured Bowie was enraged and tried to kill Wright with his bare hands.
Wright's friends intervened and stopped the attack, and Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife on his person from then on.
Wright supported Wells' opponent, Dr. Thomas Harris Maddox.
The duelists each fired two shots, and, as neither man had been injured, resolved their duel with a handshake.
[23] Other members of the groups, who had various reasons for disliking each other, began fighting.
Bowie was shot in the hip; after regaining his feet he drew a large knife, described as a butcher knife, and charged his attacker.
Wright shot at, and missed, the prone Bowie, who returned fire and possibly hit Wright.
[24] Wright died instantly, and Bowie, with Wright's sword still protruding from his chest, was shot again and stabbed by another member of the group.
[25]Newspapers picked up the story, which became known as the Sandbar Fight.
Witness accounts all agreed that Bowie did not attack first, and the others had focused their attack on Bowie because "they considered him the most dangerous man among their opposition."
[17]There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same kind of knife now known as a Bowie knife.
Many different accounts exist of who designed and built the first Bowie knife.
[27] However, in a letter to The Planter's Advocate, Rezin Bowie claimed to have invented the knife.
[28] and many Bowie family members and "most authorities on the Bowie knife tend to believe it was invented by" Bowie's brother Rezin.
[29]After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie successfully used his knife to defend himself, his knife became very popular.
[30] His fame, and that of his knife, spread to England, and by the early 1830s many British knife manufacturers were producing Bowie knives, shipping many of them to the United States for sale.
[34] He was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith in San Antonio on April 28, 1828, sponsored by the San Antonio alcade (mayor) Juan Martin de Veramendi and his wife Josefa Navarro.
[35] After that he returned to his travels in Louisiana and Mississippi.
In 1829, he became engaged to Cecilia Wells, but she died in Alexandria on September 29, two weeks before their wedding.
On February 20 Bowie and his friend took the oath of allegiance to Mexico and then proceeded to San Antonio de Bexar.
[17] At the time, San Antonio de Bexar, known as Bexar, had a population of 2500 people, mostly of Mexican descent, and Bowie's fluency in Spanish helped him to establish himself in the area.
[36]Later that year, Bowie was elected a commander of the Texas Rangers.
Other areas began similar volunteer militias, and Bowie had been elected by a group of the volunteers.
[37]Bowie became a Mexican citizen on September 30, 1830, after promising to establish textile mills in the province of Coahuila y Tejas.
He convinced 14 or 15 other citizens to apply for land and turn it over to him, giving him 700,000 acres (2,834 km²) of land to speculate with.
Bowie may also have been the first to induce settlers to apply for empresario grants and then buy it from him.
[39] The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation.
At the time, Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $223,000, most of it in land with questionable titles.
[41] The couple built a house in San Antonio, on land de Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission.
After a short time, however, they moved into the Veramendi Palace, living with Ursula's parents, who supplied them with spending money.
[43] [44]San Saba Mine
In the first years of his marriage, Bowie was often away from home, either pursuing Indians with the Rangers, or for business deals and silver mine hunts.
[43] Shortly after his marriage he became fascinated with the story of the "lost" Los Almagres Mine, said to be west of San Antonio near the ruin of Santa Cruz de San Sabá Mission.
[22] The mine had been operated by the local Indians before being seized by the Spanish.
It was believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area, the Lipan Apaches took over the mines.
On November 2, 1831 with his brother Rezin and nine others, Bowie set out for San Saba.
[15][22]The group returned to San Antonio on December 10 and Bowie wrote a report, in Spanish, of the expedition.
[45] The following month Bowie set out again with a larger force.
After two and a half months of searching, the group returned home with nothing to show for their efforts.
The Indians had learned they were coming, however, and fled, and although Bowie and his group rode for several hundred miles, they "never saw an Indian."
[49] In July 1832 Bowie, who was in Natchez, heard that the Mexican commander of Nacogdoches, Jose de las Piedras, had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms.
[17] Bowie returned to Texas and on August 2, 1832 joined a group of other Texans in marching into Nacogdoches to "present their demands" to Piedras.
[49] Before the group reached the building housing the town officials, they were attacked by a force of 100 Mexican cavalry.
[49] After a second battle in which Piedras lost 33 men, the Mexican army evacuated during the night.
Believing his family would be safer in the mountains, Bowie sent his pregnant wife and their daughter to the family estate in Monclova in the company of her parents and brother.
[51] Bowie, on business in Natchez, heard of his family's deaths in November.
From then on, he drank heavily and became "careless in his dress. "
[50]Bowie returned to land speculation in Texas in 1834 after the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in the state.
[17]Santa Anna began preparing for war, sending large numbers of Mexican troops to Texas as the Anglos in Texas began agitating for war.
[17]Stephen F. Austin returned to Texas in September 1835 and was soon elected the commander of the volunteer army in Texas.
Bowie joined the army with a small party of friends from Louisiana, and Austin quickly named him a colonel.
On the 28th of October, a Mexican force consisting of three hundred cavalry and a hundred infantry attacked Bowie and his 92 horsemen.
[17]Following the battle, Bowie tried several times to resign his commission, preferring to contribute to fights when needed but less interested in holding a formal command.
[17] After a brief absence from the army he returned in late November and, accompanied by 40 cavalry, successfully took a packtrain guarded by Mexican troops which carried food for the Mexican garrison livestock in a battle known as the Grass Fight.
[52]The Alamo Houston received word that Mexican general Santa Anna was coming to San Antonio with a large force of soldiers.
Bowie asked for volunteers, and 30 men agreed to accompany him.
They arrived on January 19, where they found a force of 104 men, with a few weapons and a few cannon but little supplies and gunpowder.
[53] Houston knew that there were not enough men to hold the fort in an attack, and had given Bowie orders to remove the artillery and blow up the fortification.
On January 26, one of Bowie's men, James Bonham, organized a rally, which passed a resolution in favor of holding the Alamo.
[54]They were joined in the next few weeks by William Travis, with 30 men, and Davy Crockett, with 12 additional men.
After the Alamo's commander, Colonel James C. Neill, left the mission, the men elected Bowie as their commander.
He celebrated by getting drunk.
[58] Santa Anna and his army reached the outskirts of San Antonio de Bexar several days later,[59] and the army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24.
[61] According to Louis "Moses" Rose, the only man known to have deserted the Texan forces at the Alamo, when Travis realized that the Mexicans would prevail in the upcoming battle, Travis drew a line in the sand and asked those willing to die for the cause to cross the line.
Bowie asked that his cot be carried over the line, and Crockett and several others assisted him in joining the others.
After the conclusion of the battle, Santa Anna ordered the alcade of San Antonio, Francisco Antonio Ruiz, to confirm the identities of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
[65] Santa Anna first gave orders for Bowie to be buried, saying he was too brave a man to be burned like a dog,[66] but later changed his mind and had Bowie's body placed with those of the other Texians on the funeral pyre.
According to a newspaper article, a Mexican soldier claimed to have seen Bowie brought from his room on his cot, alive, after the conclusion of the battle.
This account has been disputed by numerous other witnesses and it thought to have been invented by the reporter.
[69] Various other stories circulated, with witnesses claiming that Bowie shot himself, and others saying he was killed by soldiers while too weak to lift his head.
[72]LegacyDespite his continual pronouncements of wealth, after Bowie's death his actual estate was found to be very small.
His possessions were sold at auction and brought in only $99.50.
He was strong-willed and adventurous.
He is most often associated with the knife that bears his name.
