How a New York society girl came to inherit the ghost of an English bride June 6, 2013 by Freaky Folk Tales
The Mistletoe Bride In 1923, one of the most touching and melodramatic of legends connected with the ancient castles of England was brought vividly to the attention of an American readership by the reported appearance of “The Mistletoe Bride.”
This most thrilling of old English family legends tells of a bride who was lost on her wedding day and not found until fifty years afterward.
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, who made the most exhaustive study of old English romances and mysteries, writes in his “Strange Pages from Family Papers”:— “The chest in which The Mistletoe Bride was found is shown to visitors at Bramshill House, Hampshire, the residence of Sir John Cope.”
Now, this statement was of peculiar interest because, in 1923, a charming American society girl, Miss Edna Hilton, had just become the bride of Captain Denzil Cope, heir of Sir Anthony Cope, the chief of the ancient family that had long occupied the old house.
The Mistletoe Bride, Bramshill House Mrs Cope was well known in New York society as she was one of the Hilton family that inherited part of the Stewart millions.
Would she have the hardihood to climb into it herself?
In his song Bayly says that it was Lord Lovell’s bride who “hid from her lord in the old oak chest.”
He does not mention the bride’s name, but from various other sources it is known that she belonged to the ancient family of the Copes who possess the chest in which she died.
So vast were the apartments that even persons who had spent their lives there would not have been familiar with all of them.
The wedding festivities even in the noblest families were often conducted with a gaiety and abandon than would have seemed shocking to the refined tastes of the modern age.
For these reasons the wedding at Bramshill House was one of the greatest and merriest that had ever been known in England.
The young bridegroom was naturally anxious to be the first to find her.
The unhappy Lord Lovell never believed for a moment that his bride had deserted him.
He was sure from the first that some tragedy had befallen her.
He spent his whole life searching for his lost bride.
Lord Lovell grew old and withered, but his passionate quest for his lost bride kept him alive.
The panelling flew open and revealed a secret closet.
The Mistletoe Bride, Bramshill House Evidently the little bride had learned of the secret closet in some way and had run to it, thinking to give her pursuers a hard puzzle.
The cruel death of the beautiful bride on her wedding day is perhaps the most tragic combination of circumstances that could possibly be imagined.
The air in the chest alone would not have kept a person alive for that time.
Did she hear the footsteps of her bridegroom searching for her in the night?
But the Copes were far too wealthy to be restricted to one residence in England, and as it was quite in the order of events that the young couple should later move to Oxfordshire.
To be continued…
