Ptolemy I
Soter Ptolemy Soter
I (Ancient Greek: Πτολεμαῖος Σωτήρ, Ptolemaĩos Sōtḗr, i.e. Ptolemy (pronounced /ˈtɒləmi/) the Savior), also known as Ptolemy Lagides,[1]
c. 367 BC – c. 283 BC, was a Macedonian general under Alexander the Great, one of the three Diadochi who succeeded to his empire.
Ptolemy's mother was Arsinoe of Macedon, and, while his father is unknown, ancient sources variously describe him either as the son of Lagus, a Macedonian nobleman, or as an illegitimate son of Philip II of Macedon (which, if true, would have made Ptolemy the half-brother of Alexander), but it is possible that this is a later myth fabricated to glorify the Ptolemaic dynasty.
He was succeeded by his son Ptolemy II Philadelphus.
[3] During Alexander's campaign in the Indian subcontinent Ptolemy was in command of the advance guard at the siege of Aornos and fought at the Battle of the Hydaspes River.
Successor of Alexander[edit]When Alexander died in 323 BC, Ptolemy is said to have instigated the resettlement of the empire made at Babylon.
[5] Ptolemy's decision to defend the Nile against Perdiccas's attempt to force it ended in fiasco for Perdiccas, with the loss of 2000 men.
[7]In the long wars that followed between the different Diadochi, Ptolemy's first goal was to hold Egypt securely, and his second was to secure control in the outlying areas: Cyrenaica and Cyprus, as well as Syria, including the province of Judea.
His first occupation of Syria was in 318, and he established at the same time a protectorate over the petty kings of Cyprus.
Again he occupied Syria, and again—after only a few months, when Demetrius had won a battle over his general, and Antigonus entered Syria in force—he evacuated it.
The peace did not last long, and in 309 Ptolemy personally commanded a fleet that detached the coastal towns of Lycia and Caria from Antigonus, then crossed into Greece, where he took possession of Corinth, Sicyon and Megara (308 BC).
The satraps Antigonus and Demetrius now each assumed the title of king; Ptolemy, as well as Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus I Nicator, responded by doing the same.
When the coalition against Antigonus was renewed in 302, Ptolemy joined it, and invaded Syria a third time, while Antigonus was engaged with Lysimachus in Asia Minor.
But when the news came that Antigonus had been defeated and slain by Lysimachus and Seleucus at the Battle of Ipsus in 301, he occupied Syria a fourth time.
[8]He himself wrote a history of Alexander's campaigns that has not survived.
Arrian of Nicomedia, author of the most widely read account of Alexander the Great, noted that he relied most heavily on Ptolemy's history because "as he himself was a king, mendacity would have been more dishonorable for him than for anyone else."
[9] However, as noted by A.B.
According to Proclus Euclid famously quipped: "Sire, there is no Royal Road to geometry."
L. Sprague de Camp's novel The Bronze God of Rhodes features Ptolemy as a minor character.
He also appears in her non-fictional The Nature of Alexander.
Ptolemy features as an important supporting character in Stealing Fire, a historical fantasy novel by Jo Graham which explores the years immediately after the death of Alexander the Great.
Ptolemy is the main protagonist of Christian Cameron's God of War (2012), a fictional account of Alexander the Great's life and campaigns as narrated by Ptolemy himself.
