Ancient egypt old middle and new kingdomANCIENT EGYPT: OLD, MIDDLE, AND NEW KINGDOMOutlineI. Theirinfluences are noticable in art, architecture, and religion.
Zoser, the first pharaoh.
1. built the famed Step Pyramid2.
Middle Kingdom religion1.
Similarties between the myth of Osiris and Christian beliefsC. Middle Kingdom
artD.
The New KingdomA. New art form, naturalisticD. Throughout the ages known as the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and New Kingdom, there has been alterations to their religion, art, and architecture.
Let us begin at the beginning, with the Old Kingdom.
The Old Kingdom began in the year 2700 B.C. Thepharaohs, or kings, of this time include the third through the sixth dynasty, beginning with Djoser and ending with Pepi II.
Pyramids were erected for the pharaoh in the belief that it would serve as astairway to the heavens, and allow the divine pharaoh to reach the Milky Way, or the Nileriver in the sky.
These pyramids could not have been built through coercion or slavery, forsuch an architectural feat could only have been accomplished by a labor force of 70,000,and there is no possible way for a small group of rulers to force the people to labor day inand day out without some kind of reward in the afterlife.
The religion of the ancient Egyptians was rather complex.
There were two distinct groups of gods: local and state, and household.
When the chief of a particular village came into state power, itwas his local god that became a nationally-renowned state god.
He had a steady rise in power beginning in the second dynasty, andby the fifth dynasty Re was considered the chief god of state.
It was believed that the pharaoh was a god himself, and that his power was to berevered and worshipped.
But the priesthood that worshipped Re began a slow steadyusurpation of power from the pharaohs in the fifth dynasty.
The decline in the quality as well as the size of pyramids were the result ofthis shift in power.
Art in the Old Kingdom was not simply for beauty, but for utility as well.
For that reason, statues were not erected in marketplaces, but rather in a templewhere they might serve some practical purpose in the afterlife (Breasted 102).
Itwasn't until the Middle Kingdom that Egypt began to recapture the glory it once held.
The once-absolute sun god, Re, was replaced by the god Osiris.
The appeal of Osiris was that he promised a more democratic afterlife; the common man could lookforward to his own life after death.
Isis, Osiris' wife, fled to the delta of the Nile and gave birthto Osiris' son, Horus, posthumously.
In addition, the Middle Kingdom was renowned for it's literary masterpieces.
The ensuingera, known as the New Kingdom, lasted from 1465 B.C. Pyramids were no longer used as burialgrounds; instead, the famed Valley of Kings is the final resting place for the pharaohs ofthis age.
The god Re came back intopower when he was unified with another god called Amun.
This new god was known as Amun-Re, and was once again the focus of the priesthood.
With this new religion, the only supremepowers were Aton and Akhenaton himself.
Aton was not simplythe god of Egypt, but a god of the entire universe.
Eventually, internal struggles led to the weakening of Egypt, until they were finallyconquered by the Greeks.
