The principal Elevation of Bramshill House, in Hampshire, the Seat of Sir John Cope, Bart.
The central compartment of the36 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.
Date 1603,— This front towards the east,exhibits comparatively little ornament, but shows that general unifor-mity in design was preserved, even although it was necessary forinternal convenience to vary the situation and size of particularwindows.
In the centre of this front is a bold projection, in which isthe arch of entrance, and above it a bay window.
This projection, likethe rest of the building, is crowned with an ornamental pierced parapet,and the whole is surmounted by a large gable, containing a recessedniche and statue of King James I. — The extent of this front is aboutone hundred and ninety-three feet, and in height, to the top of theparapet, forty-six feet : its principal feature, and most important dif-ference from the other fronts of this noble building, is a terrace twenty-five feet in width between the projecting wings, a kind of architecturalfore-ground to the garden, which is extremely beautiful.
The Arcade at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
— The Arcade on the terrace of the southern front is hereshown : it is a feature of domestic architecture, borrowed from Italy,where the terrace answered the purpose of exercise, and became animportant accessory to every villa.
This ideahas been combated by Mr. Woods, in his " Letters of an Architect,"who admits that the judgment does not easily reconcile itself to archesupon columns or on posts, for a column is only an ornamented stonepost, but he confesses that there is a delightful hghtness and airinessof effect produced by the distribution, difficult to be obtained by othermeans.
The order intended is Doric ; but in this instance it is made38 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.
The Stone Screen in the Hall at Bramshill House,in Hampshire.
The side of the Drawing-room at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
The frieze is a beautiful design of a running pattern offoliage and fruit, which is shown at large on the next Plate, togetherwith the mouldings and size of the panels.
The Details at large of the Drawing-room and Library at Bramshill House, Hampshire.
The Chimney-piece in the Drawing-room at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
The distribution of the members is pure and regular; thecolumns, with their capitals and entablature, are well suited to eachother, and the whole is surmounted by a sculptured pediment, whichlises to the cornice of the room.
A profile of the projection of the Chimney-piece is shown on the Plate.
in 1688.
In length this beautiful apartment is thirty-three feet eight inches,and in breadth, exclusive of a large oriel at the upper end, it is twentyfeet two inches : in height the room is not more than eleven feet.
The whole apartment is panelled with fine oak, insmall panels, with bold and simple mouldings ; on the walls no surbaseis indicated, but the Corinthian pilasters are raised on very highpedestals, which are enriched on the upper parts by carved ornaments,taking the form of small arches, their spandrils and centres filled witharabesques.
—
Hatfield House is situated on an eminence, commanding viewsin every direction of an undulated country, equally remarkable for itsnatural beauty and excessive fertility ; the park is watered by the river Lea, and is distant six miles from St. Alban's, and seven from Heitford.
The two wings on the principal front of Hatfield House, are con-nected by a magnificent centre, raised with two orders of architecture ;and with its entrance porch, which is highly enriched, may be con-sidered as the most commanding feature of the edifice.
It is also behoved that no house in the king-dom, erected at so early a date, remains so perfectly entire as this.
Hatfield Plouse forms one of the subjects in Mr. Robinson's Vitruvius Britannicus, but the details now shown are not given in that valuablework ; amongst the illustrations, is, however, a most beautiful view of thegallery to which these windows belong; the length of this galleryis one hundred and sixty-three feet, but notwithstanding its extremelength and richness of architectural character, the eng-ravino- is finishedwith accuracy, while the general peculiarity of effect is at the sametime admirably preserved.
— The subjects of this Plate are : 1.
