Bramshill House Bramshill House: Location Bramshill House Location of Bramshill House in Hampshire Bramshill House is located at the approximate centre of a triangular shape formed by Reading, Basingstoke and Farnborough, about 47 miles by road southwest of central London.
His first wife, Constance de Bramshill, may have been the heiress of the Bramshill family.
Giles's son Henry Daubeney sold the property to Henry VIII, and in 1547 Edward VI granted the estate to William Paulet, whose heirs sold it in 1600 to Sir Stephen Thornhurst of Agnes Court, Kent.
The Cope family shortened the wings on the south side in 1703, converted most of the chapel to a drawing room and introduced a mezzanine on the west side during the 18th century.
It was used by the Red Cross as a maternity home during the Second World War, after which it became the home of the exiled King Michael and Queen Anne of Romania for several years.
Bramshill House became a Grade I listed building on 8 July 1952, and was acquired by the British government the following year as a dedicated site for police training.
Bramshill House is three storeys high on the southern main entrance side and two storeys high to the north and east.
Thorpe originally intended the main entrance of the house to be on this side, building on the gatehouse of the earlier Foxley house.
It is three storeys high and features three sets of three bays in either wing, with five inner sections.
The inner two sections feature the same layout on the first and top floors with eight windows aligned in rows of four on the first floor and four windows on the top floor, but the ground floor features two arches, which form part of the central loggia.
It features four full-height angular bays with two windows between, while its upper walls have two arches set within a rectangular panel.
On this side there is a Troco Terrace with a lawn, as well as two arcaded openings at the side on either wing of the house.
It has a dais and a Jacobean stone screen, 13 feet high, decorated with 92 shields.
During the time of the Cope family in the 1880s, the kitchen near the south hall was used as a dairy.
It is two storeys in height, the lower being Doric and the upper Ionic.
Also on the first floor is the "Chapel Drawing Room" in the south wing, connected to the Drawing Room.
The tapestry in the chapel room is older than the house, and was assessed by an expert as dating to 1450 or earlier; in the early 19th century it had hung in the Red Drawing Room.
ConclusionBramshill House, south façade with oriel window in centre Bramshill House, in Bramshill, northeast Hampshire, England, is one of the largest and most important Jacobean prodigy house mansions in England.
It was built in the early 17th century by Baron Edward la Zouche of Harringworth, but was partly destroyed by fire a few years later.
The mansion's southern façade is notable for its decorative architecture, which includes at its centre a large oriel window above the principal entrance.
