The Sun Never Set on the British Empire,"Dominion over palm and pine"Some chronicler, speaking of Asia, asserted that one man ruled as much land as the sun passed, and his statement was not true because he placed all Africa and Europe outside the limits where the sun rises in the East and sets in the West.
It has now however turned out to be true.
Aelius Aristides, , "To Rome," 143 AD, The Ruling Power: A Study of the Roman Empire in the Second Century After Christ Through the Roman Oration of Aelius Aristides, James H. Oliver, The American Philosophical Society, 1953, p.896The sun never set on the British Empire because the sun sets in the West and the British Empire was in the East.
Edmund Burke, 1774 Far-called, our navies melt away;On dune and headland sinks the fire:Lo, all our pomp of yesterday Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
Rudyard Kipling, "Recessional,"
1897 Poor loves.
All gone.
(All British possessions are listed below.)
The time zones on the diagram themselves may be said to be artifacts of the British Empire,since they are based on the Meridian of Greenwich -- at the original Royal Observatory, 1675-1953, in London (as seen in the image at right), where the building to the right contains the meridian transit instrument that defines the line of zero longitude.
The animation may also be used to inspect the operation of the International Dateline, which divides the -12h/+12h time zone.
Some time zone boundaries have been changed since 1937.
The Gambia no longer seems to be in the -1h time zone.
Also, there have been several time zones that are at a half hour rather than a whole hour interval from Greenwich, including today India (+5h30m), Burma (+6h30m), and central Australia (+9h30m).
The "British Empire" was not a de jure entity (like the Roman Empire, German Empire, Austrian Empire, Russian Empire, or Japanese Empire), since Britain itself was a kingdom (the "United Kingdom" of Great Britain and Ireland,or Northern Ireland in 1937).
One British possession, however, was an empire, namely India, where British rule comes to be called the "Raj," , or .
Queen Victoria became "Empress of India" in 1876.
The formal British adoption of India as an Empire, however, was seen at the time as a response to Bismark's creation of the German Empire (1871).
The "British Empire" usually means, on the other hand, not something in relation to the Empire of India, but the whole of British colonial possessions spread around the world.
"Empire" had been used this way long before there was any 19th century ideology on the subject, for it or against it.
But as an "Empire," British possessions do not look much like Rome, China, or Russia, which were geographically continguous, with simple, continuous borders.
Instead, the "British Empire" was functionally a bit more like the later Holy Roman Empire, whose fragmentation and particularism -- a "jury rig" in British nautical terms -- gravely compromised such power as we might expect of the whole.
The power of Britain at its height was almost entirely a function of that of Great Britain itself, as the power of the later Holy Rome Emperors was almost entirely a function of that of the Hapsburgs.
Most would not consider this a flattering characterization of Britain's achievement, since the Holy Roman Empire was famously, in Voltaire's words, neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire.
By 1939, Australia and New Zealand had long been expressing reservations about involvement in (another) European war, and this line of thinking was only cut short when it became clear that a direct threat from Japan was a reflex of the European situation.
When Britain was then unable to stop the Japanese, Australia and New Zealand formed ties with the United States that soon rivaled in sentiment (at least) those for Britain.
What the hell kind of "Empire" is it when you don't even rule parts of it?
But Britain barely considered constitutional intregration of colonies into Great Britain.
While India was the "Jewel in the Crown" of the Empire, its role in British power was also unlike the possessions of more conventional Empires.
It was the seat of an entirely different and ancient Civilization, with a vastly larger population than all the rest of British domains put together, and the British were always determined to maintain a distance and a separation from it.
The British Empire could therefore have never gone the way of the Roman Empire, where eventually all (free) inhabitants came to enjoy a common citizenship and a common participation in the political, military, cultural, and religious life of the whole.
The British liked to think of themselves as modern Romans, but a fate comparable to Rome, where India would have dominated Britain demographically, politically, and perhaps even religiously, was not something they were willing to contemplate.
Yet the dynamic of British ideology and practice was headed in that direction and could only be forestalled by arbitrary and incoherent barriers.
Thus, 19th century Britain, when it realized that it was not just out to make money but had come to assume the moral responsibility of ruling millions of people in their own interest, came to see itself as on a civilizing mission and soon began in earnest to educate and assimilate Indians (and later, Africans, Chinese, etc.)
Liberals, like John Stuart Mill, could get behind this project and bless British India as a paragon of virtue and altruism.
By all the ordinary dynamics of Empire (or at least Roman Empire), an educated Indian could be expected to circulate freely among Englishmen, possess the same dignity and freedom as other Subjects of Queen Victoria, and reasonably be expected to participate in the Government of his own country, as many British had already said that modernized Indians could be expected to do.
This policy, however perverse, could be partially maintained in India after the Mutiny, by way of the Princely States, but much of India already was ruled directly by the British Crown.
What could possibly prevent Queen Victoria's promise of equal "appointments" from being fulfilled in that case?
Eugenics remained popular in some circles for decades, and not just in Nazi Germany.
What sound like eugenic questions still arise over the results of IQ tests, although professor Pearson probably would have been disconcerted that Jews tend to score the best among whites, while Chinese, Japanese, and other East Asians tend to score the highest overall.
If Indians were racially inferior and could not be trusted to rule their own country, how could one of them become a Member of Parliament in Britain itself?
To the extent that Hitler actually admired the power (and racism) of the British Empire, he helped to destroy it.
Someone like Mohandas Gandhi could feel this inconsistency in the most personal way, after he had enjoyed the easy equality and personal friendships of his life in London, while he was a law student in the Middle Temple, and then experienced the color barrier and personal insults, sometimes from the same individuals, after he had returned to India.
Yet even Gandhi remained a supporter of British liberal principles, in the law and the Empire, for many years.
While it was assumed by one and all that India added a substantial increment to British power and perhaps even constituted a major portion of what was needed by Britain for Great Power status, the economic development of the country, even after the growth fostered by British investment and modernization, was so relatively backward that there was little that India, which certainly had been one of the Great Powers of the Earth in the 16th century, contributed in modern terms.
However, the British garrison in India was there in large part to secure India, and prevent another Mutiny, not to otherwise be used for British military purposes.
In the sphere of influence of the Indian Government, the Indian Army, British and Native, could be used for local purposes.
In those terms, Britain was riding an Indian Empire that might be functioning much as it would, as a regional Power, if the British weren't even there.
A few Indian troops were used in Europe in World War I, but the value of the Indian Army was otherwise within the range we might expect, in Mesopotamia in World War I and then Malaya and Burma in World War II.
India was not going to pay for any part of the British Army anymore.
What this looks like in retrospect, then, is that if India had ever truly been integrated with Britain, and had ever achieved anything like the same level of economic development, the whole would have had the potential to be a Superpower on the level of the United States or, certainly, the Soviet Union.
But there was never any realistic chance of anything of the sort; and even in 2013, India is still struggling to emerge as a Great Power in its own right, for the first time since the Moghuls.
Despite the informal and even confused nature of the larger "British Empire," the term "imperial" worked its way into various official terminology about British possessions, e.g. the "Imperial General Staff" and the "Imperial War Museum.
"
When India and Pakistan became independent in 1947, the Indian Empire ceased to exist and both countries became, for a time, Dominions -- the category for previous British self-governing territories, starting with Canada (1867) and later coming to include the Commonwealth of Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, and, for a time (1926-1934), little Newfoundland (which did not join Canada until 1949).
As the "Empire" faded, the British Commonwealth took over, though that organization seemed to offer less and less as time went on in terms of real economic, military, or political advantages.
Indeed, if the Holy Roman Empire was in some ways analogous to the British Empire, then the Commonwealth may be compared to the German Confederation of 1815, where there was no pretense that the sovereignty of its members was in the least compromised by the largely symbolic organization of the whole.
In retrospect, "Empire" was never the best term for the constellation of British possessions.
But when we see the string of small naval bases stretching from Gibraltar, to Malta, to Aden, Singapore, and Hong Kong, this is reminiscent of something significant in Classical history.
And there we find the words.
This was a status of neither conquest nor rule, but it involved varying degrees of control and influence.
And there were antecedents to such a structure.
But the Greeks knew what to call it; and the hegemony possessed by Athens then passed to Sparta, to Thebes, and finally to Macedonia.
In those terms, India, the Dominions, and then the substantial African colonies were anomalous -- except that in some ways, the Greeks had done that also.
Greek colonies, as it happened, immediately become autonomous; but then, with the lag of a few years, so did the British Dominions.
The nineteenth century "scramble for Africa" fleshed out substantial possessions there, but this all was a late addition to the hegemonic power substantively founded on bases, Dominions, and that one true Empire, India.
The status of a "hegemon" is something that we also find very far from Greece.
They did not conquer or rule all the others.
The British Empire as consisting of something more like a hegemony is even more illuminating when we come to the predominant power that is widely seen as succeeding to the global status of Britain: The United States of America, itself a daughter of British hegemony.
While the role and actions of the United States are routinely called "imperialism" by the Leninist Left and the Isolationist Right, the United States has none of the kinds of territorial possessions that were enjoyed by Britain.
The foreign bases of the United States, although many, and from which it can project its power, beyond what can even be done with its substantial naval forces, consist of no sovereign American territory -- except in the chain of islands, Midway, Wake, and Guam, that were acquired in the 19th century in imitation of Britain.
Even something that was sovereign territory, the Panama Canal Zone, was nevertheless surrendered to Panama.
The United States clearly does not have an Empire; but it is also, clearly, a hegemon, .
This status may be as fragile as it was for Athens, or for Britain, but the territorial heart of the United States is also a much greater source of power than was that of Athens, Britain, the Hapsburgs, Macedon, or the typical Spring and Autumn state.
Britain lost not just the will to Empire but the power for hegemony.
Although the first industrial power, by 1900 Britain had been surpassed by both United States and by Germany; but Britain was still the financial center of the world and the premier merchant carrier.
British trade in 1900 and between 1909 & 1913, and foreign investment in 1914, is shown in the following table.
Somewhat different figures for trade are given in Cristopher Bayly's Atlas of the British Empire and T.O. Lloyd's The British Empire, 1558-1995, and for investment in Lloyd and John Darwin's Unfinished Empire, so both sets of figures from are given.
Nigel Dalziel's The Penguin Historical Atlas of the British Empire only gives trade figures for British possessions, thus obscuring the predominance of foreign trade in the British economy.
But it is nice to see the truly massive amount of British investment in Argentina, larger than both India and Australia.
However, as David Hume noted as early as 1752, this really just means that enough money is exported to make up the difference.
This would cause a deflation, unless enough money is created or brought in (for investment) to make up the difference.
This kind of thing was later thought to be indicative of American decline when the United States began to run large trade deficits and in the 1980's became a net debtor from foreign investment in United States securities.
Indeed, when Americans in the 1980's worried about the Japanese buying up the United States, the largest foreign investors were actually British -- which for the future meant American growth rather than British growth.
Another lesson to be read off the trade figures is that a relatively small fraction of British trade involved colonies that would later constitute the "Third World. "
Indeed, the only trade surpluses in the table are with India, Africa, the West Indies, and the Far East, which might give some heart to Marxist claims that British colonies, especially India, were the outlet for Capitalist "excess production. "
However, the trade surpluses are small, and overall British trade with India and the other colonies is hardly larger than with the much, much smaller populations of Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
Indeed, Europe, the United States, Australia, Canada, etc. are the places where more people would have enough money to buy British goods.
Hobson in 1902 (Imperialism), and later taken up by Lenin, that British conquest followed British investment.
Lenin saw British colonies as the necessary outlet for British capital, as well as for British capitalist "overproduction. "
Unfortunately, if this thesis were true, then the British should have been conquering the United States, not South Africa, since the largest single destination of British investment was the Americas, but Canada was the only large scale British possession.
But just as Hobson and Lenin were the kind of people who would never know how to invest capital productively, Britain itself was losing its previous genius in that area also.
In the new gasoline economies of automobiles and airplanes, let alone the electronic industries of light and radio, Britain was never in the lead and never caught up.
Canada has come up with its own flag (losing the Union Jack canton), its own national anthem ("Oh Canada!")
Why Canada should then continue with a "Queen's Government," or even as a single country, is increasingly an open question.
Meanwhile, Australia, always resentful of much of what happened in World War I (at Gallipoli) and in World War II (at Singapore and in Burma), contains a powerful movement to become a Republic.
In Britain, you drive on the left, and cars have the steering wheel on the right.
It was probably France and United States that established the larger international pattern of driving on the right, with the steering wheel on the left.
Portugal and Sweden, however, switched on their own.
Elsewhere, switches from left to right reflect the decline in British influence.
In former British colonies, this is also understandable.
Otherwise, major former British possessions, like a large part of Africa, India, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, etc.
The Indian Ocean still looks like a British Mare Nostrum in terms of driving preference.
So what went wrong with the British Empire?
I have examined in detail elsewhere what went wrong with Rome, and here I have already compared the British Empire to the Holy Roman Empire, which might imply a parallel analysis.
But if the reality of the power of the later Holy Roman Emperors was actually the power of the Hapsburgs, and the power of the British Empire was Britain, what happened to that power?
Would Britain inevitably be ground down by the greater resources, human and material, of the superpowers?
But Britain hurried its decline with the dynamic of its own attitudes.
For the key to British power was the Industrial Revolution.
This began in Britain, and in the 19th century it made her the "workshop of the world."
But that advantage did not last. ),
Scots, foreigners, and other marginal types.
But even Uncle Matthew, with the experience of Mitford's father in India, was an internationalist compared to the greatest caricature of the English in English history, the "Hobbits" of J.R.R. Tolkein's The Lord of the Rings [1954-1955].
This was bad enough, and it had its effect.
But the education of a British Public (i.e. private) School like Eton was not an education in engineering or management or finance; it was an education in the qualities of command, leadership, and rule.
But that tells the tale.
had been passed to the United States, and the British more or less forgot that they had simply dropped that torch, as it were, as they prepared to rule the Wogs for their own good.
But there is something else about the Empire.
Eventually, anti-globalization protesters would be shocked to learn that what Third World countries wanted from the world economy was free trade -- their agricultural products were being kept out by the protectionism of the United States and the European Union.
But even if the British were better stewards of African economies, isn't it still true that they simply did not have the right to rule other people against their will?
Well, I am presently, in a democracy, ruled by other people against my will.
Indeed, since about 1988 I have not voted for anyone who ended up being elected, while those who were elected daily violate the Constitution, and criminally assault my rights, which they all swear an oath to uphold.
There is a word for this: the tyranny of the majority.
Of course the former is preferable, although the problem, since Plato, has always been to identify an autocrat who has the wisdom to rule and not be corrupted by wealth and power.
There is no solution to that problem.
With the British Empire, the key question to ask is how it really got started, and why so much of it began, or continued to consist of, little bits like Bombay, the Gambia, Penang, Hong Kong, etc.
These were all little defensive pockets in areas where life and property were not otherwise safe.
The Pax Britannica, like the Pax Romana, may have involved some little wars going on someplace most of the time, but the overall effect was to render trade and travel safe in a way that they usually had not been previously.
This is not unlike the situation in the Mediterranean for many centuries, when the Barbary pirates were only finally put down by the French occupation of Algeria in 1830.
And if the Somalis, or Algerians, could not live their lives without preying on international shipping, it is not clear that they morally retain their right to independence and self-rule.
There is also the fate of a place like Ceylon.
The removal of the Imperial hand releases conflicts that sometimes have been created by the colonial power (e.g. Jewish immigration into Palestine) but usually involve much older, preexisting problems.
Thus, the conflict between Tamils and Sinhalese in Ceylon long antedates, by centuries, the arrival of the British, or any Europeans.
Under the British, however, the conflict had been minimized to the extent that most people were not even aware of it and in no fear of its returning.
Yet by then this had all changed.
In 1956 a government hostile to the Tamils was elected.
Soon the "gentle" Sinhalese would be burning people alive.
The more than 50 years of history since then, of the country now called Sri Lanka, has consisted of legal ethnic discrimination, fierce riots, and a grim, nasty, protracted civil war, which only seems to have been put down in 2009 -- or at least the principal Tamil fighters have been destroyed.
The Council, of course, moved to protect the Tamils, but then the Ceylonese Government abolished the right of such appeals and quashed any remedy for the Tamils.
This did not do anyone any good.
A bit of Imperial slaughter was sometimes necessary in such conflicts, and are now viewed with horror, but we can see the scale to which real slaughter can rise without the Empire to give all parties something to fear in common.
The British are often blamed for the conflict that resulted from the Partition of India, but, again, the elements of the conflict long preexisted the arrival of any Europeans.
British rule was at least preferable to Hindu.
In its absence, not only did we see the riots and slaughters of 1947-1948, but we subsequently have had several wars and now a nuclear stand-off between India and Pakistan -- a Pakistan which has generally been subject to military dicatorships in its history, and now to Islamic radicals and fundamentalism (from people the British were already calling the "Hindustan fanatics").
In short, the sort of Federal system that is supposed to characterize the government of the United States.
Chamberlain forgot to include Celts in the "greatness and importance" of his "race. "
Unfortunately, even if it had, this sort of structure for government has still not been perfected.
If the United States government now assumes all the powers of government, and assumes the unlimited powers that were the horror of the Founding Fathers -- with an explicit program to do so from the treacherous Democratic Party -- it is not clear that the British Empire could have done any better.
For a while, the balance of power between Britain and the Dominions was a rough version of this, but a federalism in theory or practice was never embodied in the relevant laws.
In the absence of an effective such system, the actual fate of the British Empire, of the several independence of its members, may have been the best, as it was the inevitable, outcome.
ters?
Of course the former is preferable, although the problem, since Plato, has always been to identify an autocrat who has the wisdom to rule and not be corrupted by wealth and power.
There is no solution to that problem.
With the British Empire, the key question to ask is how it really got started, and why so much of it began, or continued to consist of, little bits like Bombay, the Gambia, Penang, Hong Kong, etc.
These were all little defensive pockets in areas where life and property were not otherwise safe.
The Pax Britannica, like the Pax Romana, may have involved some little wars going on someplace most of the time, but the overall effect was to render trade and travel safe in a way that they usually had not been previously.
This is not unlike the situation in the Mediterranean for many centuries, when the Barbary pirates were only finally put down by the French occupation of Algeria in 1830.
And if the Somalis, or Algerians, could not live their lives without preying on international shipping, it is not clear that they morally retain their right to independence and self-rule.
There is also the fate of a place like Ceylon.
The removal of the Imperial hand releases conflicts that sometimes have been created by the colonial power (e.g. Jewish immigration into Palestine) but usually involve much older, preexisting problems.
Thus, the conflict between Tamils and Sinhalese in Ceylon long antedates, by centuries, the arrival of the British, or any Europeans.
Under the British, however, the conflict had been minimized to the extent that most people were not even aware of it and in no fear of its returning.
Yet by then this had all changed.
In 1956 a government hostile to the Tamils was elected.
Soon the "gentle" Sinhalese would be burning people alive.
The more than 50 years of history since then, of the country now called Sri Lanka, has consisted of legal ethnic discrimination, fierce riots, and a grim, nasty, protracted civil war, which only seems to have been put down in 2009 -- or at least the principal Tamil fighters have been destroyed.
The Council, of course, moved to protect the Tamils, but then the Ceylonese Government abolished the right of such appeals and quashed any remedy for the Tamils.
This did not do anyone any good.
A bit of Imperial slaughter was sometimes necessary in such conflicts, and are now viewed with horror, but we can see the scale to which real slaughter can rise without the Empire to give all parties something to fear in common.
The British are often blamed for the conflict that resulted from the Partition of India, but, again, the elements of the conflict long preexisted the arrival of any Europeans.
British rule was at least preferable to Hindu.
In its absence, not only did we see the riots and slaughters of 1947-1948, but we subsequently have had several wars and now a nuclear stand-off between India and Pakistan -- a Pakistan which has generally been subject to military dicatorships in its history, and now to Islamic radicals and fundamentalism (from people the British were already calling the "Hindustan fanatics").
In short, the sort of Federal system that is supposed to characterize the government of the United States.
Chamberlain forgot to include Celts in the "greatness and importance" of his "race. "
Unfortunately, even if it had, this sort of structure for government has still not been perfected.
If the United States government now assumes all the powers of government, and assumes the unlimited powers that were the horror of the Founding Fathers -- with an explicit program to do so from the treacherous Democratic Party -- it is not clear that the British Empire could have done any better.
For a while, the balance of power between Britain and the Dominions was a rough version of this, but a federalism in theory or practice was never embodied in the relevant laws.
In the following list of present and former British possessions, current British possessions and dependencies are in boldface red, current members of the British Commonwealth are in plain red, and independent states in the Commonwealth that retain Queen Elizabeth as their Head of State are followed by a crown, .
The development of monarchical rank and hierarchy is examined elsewhere.
The list of Princely States in India is complete according to Wikipedia, but I also see that there were something like 600 of them, which is nothing like what you see here.
I have added the information Wikipedia also provides for the rank of the ruler and the number of salutes to be fired, as granted by the British (some rulers used higher numbers in their own domains), as of 1947.
Lists of rulers have now also been provided for several Princely States, linked from the index here.
He felt that this was a breach of faith; and perhaps it was -- but an inevitable one.
, Raja, 9 guns (India)Barwani, Rana, 11 guns (India)Beri (India)Bhopal, Nawab, 19 guns (India)Bijawar, Sawai Maharaja, 11 guns (India)Charkhari (India)Chhatarpur, Maharaja, 11 guns (India)Datia, Maharaja, 15 guns (India)Dewas, Raja, 15 guns (India)Dhar, Maharaja, 15 guns (India)Garrauli (India)Gaurihar (India)Indore, Maharaja, 19 guns (India)Jabua (India)Jaora, Nawab, 13 guns (India)Jaso (India)Jigni (India)Kamta-Rajaula (India)Khaniadhana (India)Khilchipur, Rao, 9 guns (India)Kothi Baghelan (India)Kurwai (India)Lugasi (India)Maihar, Raja, 9 guns (India)Makrai (India)Mathwar (India)Muhammadgarh (India)Nagod/Unchhera, Raja, 9 guns (India)Narsingarh, Raja, 11 guns (India)Orchha, Maharaja, 15 guns (India)Panna, Maharaja, 11 guns (India)Pathari (India)Piploda (India)Rajgarh, Nawab, 11 guns (India)Ratlam, Raja, 13 guns (India)Rewah, Maharaja, 17 guns (India)Samthar, Raja, 11 guns (India)Sarila (India)Sitamau, Raja, 11 guns (India)States of the Eastern States Agency Athmallik (India)Bastar (India)Baudh (India)Banaili (India)Changbhakar (India)Chhuikhadan (India)Cooch Behar, Maharaja, 13 guns (India)Darbhanga (India)Daspalla (India)Dhenkanal (India)Jashpur (India)Kalahandi, Raja, 9 guns (India)Kanker (India)Kawardha (India)Khairagarh (India)Kharsawan (India)Khondmals (India)Koriya (India)Mayurbhanj, Maharaja, 9 guns (India)Nandgaon (India)Nayagarh (India)Pal Lahara (India)Patna, Maharaja, 9 guns (India)Raigarh (India)Ramgarh (India)Sakti (India)Saraikela (India)Sarangarh (India)Sonpur (India)Surguja (India)Talcher (India)Tripura/Tipra, Raja, 13 guns (India)Udaipur (India)Andaman Islands Nicobar Islands Bhutan, British protectorate, 1910, Protectorate of India, 1949 Burma, 1826 (Arakan) 1852 (Lower Burma) 1886 (Upper Burma), independent 1948 (Myanmar 1991)Ceylon, 1795, independent 1948 (Sri Lanka)Seychelles, 1810, independent 1975 Mahé Island Amriante Isles Farquhar Group Cosmoledo Group British Indian Ocean Territory, created 1965 Chagos Archipelago Salomon Islands Peros Banhos Atoll Three Brothers, Eagle, and Danger Islands The Egmont Islands Diego Garcia Maldives, 1887, independent 1965 Mauritius, 1810, independent 1968 Rodrigues Cargados Carajos Shoals Agalega Island Malaysia, created and independent 1963 Straits Settlements, Crown colony 1867 Bencoolen (Bengkulu, Sumatra) 1685, to Dutch East Indies 1824 Singapore 1819, to Malaysia 1963, independent 1965 Penang 1786, to Malaya 1948, to Malaysia 1963 Malacca 1824, to Malaya 1948, Malaysia 1963 Labuan, 1846, to North Bornea 1890, to Singapore 1907, to Straits Settlements 1912, to North Borneo 1946 Malaya, Federation 1957, independent 1963 as Malaysia JohoreKedahKelantanNegri Sembilan PahangPerakPerlisSelangorTrengganuBritish North Borneo, 1877, to Malaysia 1963 (Sabah)Sarawak, to James Brooke 1841, Crown Colony 1946, to Malaysia 1963 Brunei, protectorate 1888, independent 1984 Weihai Wei , 1898, to China 1930 Hong Kong , 1841, to China 1997 British North America Canada, dominion 1867 Ontario (Upper Canada), 1759, autonomous 1840 Quebec (Lower Canada), 1759, autonomous 1840 Nova Scotia, 1717, autonomous 1854 New Brunswick, 1759, autonomous 1854 Prince Edward Island, 1759, autonomous 1854 Northwest Territories Yukon Territory ManitobaAlbertaSaskatchewanBritish Columbia, 1849 (Vancouver Island) 1858 Newfoundland, 1583, to Canada 1949 United States, independent 1783 New Hampshire, 1680 Massachusetts, 1629 Delaware, 1664 Pennsylvania, 1681 New Jersey, 1664 New York, 1664 Georgia, 1732 Connecticut, 1639 Maryland, 1632 South Carolina, 1665 North Carolina, 1663 Virginia, 1607 Rhode Island, 1636 VermontFlorida, 1763, to Spain 1783, to United States 1819 Mosquito Coast, 1655, to Nicaragua 1855 Surinam, 1651, Dutch Guiana 1668 British Guiana, 1796/1815, independent 1966 (Guyana)British Honduras, 1638/1786, independent 1981 (Belize)Bahama Islands, 1670, independent 1973 Turks & Caicos Islands, 1678, to Bahamas 1799, to Jamaica 1873, admnistered by Bahamas 1965-1973Grand Turk Island Salt Cay Grand Caicos Island Bermuda, 1609, to Virginia 1612, separate 1684 Cayman Islands, 1655 British Virgin Islands, 1666 West Indies Federation, federated 1956 Leeward Islands, federated 1871 Anguilla, 1650 Montserrat, 1632 Antigua, 1632, & Barbuda, 1628, independent 1981 St. Kitts, 1624, & Nevis, 1628, independent 1983 Windward Islands St. Lucia, 1815, independent 1979 Grenada, 1763, independent 1974 St. Vincent, 1763, & the Grenadines, independent 1979 Dominica, 1763, independent 1978 Barbados, 1627, independent 1966 Jamaica, 1655, independent 1962 Trinidad, 1797, & Tobago, 1763, independent 1962 Australia, Commonwealth 1901 Queensland, autonomous 1859 New South Wales, 1788, autonomous 1855 Victoria, autonomous 1855 South Australia, autonomous 1855 Western Australia, 1829, autonomous 1890 Tasmania, 1825, autonomous 1855 Northern Territory Coral Sea Islands Territory Norfolk Island & Philip Island Lord Howe Island & Ball's Pyramid Cocos (Keeling) Islands & Christmas Island McDonald Islands, Shag Island, & Heard Island Nauru, 1914, trustee of Aus, NZ, & UK, 1947, independent 1968 Papua-New Guinea, independent 1964 Papua, Queensland 1883, Australia 1901, to Papua-New Guinea New Guinea & Bismark Archipelago, from Germany 1914, Australia Trust Territory 1919, to Papua-New Guinea Solomon Islands, protectorate 1893, independent 1978 Fiji, 1874, independent 1970, leaves Commonwealth 1987 New Zealand, 1769, autonomous 1853 Cook Islands, etc.
Phoenix Group Phoenix Island Sydney Island Hull Island Gardner Island Canton Island, US-UK condominium Enderbury Island, US-UK condominium Christmas Island Fanning Island Washington Island Starbuck Island Malden Island Union of South Africa, 1910, Republic of South Africa, out of Commonwealth 1961-1994, rejoins Commonwealth 1994 Cape Colony, 1795 Natal, 1843 Orange Free State, protectorate 1848, independent 1854, annexed 1902 Transvaal, protectorate 1877, independent 1881, annexed 1902 Prince Edward Islands Walvis Bay, 1884, to Southwest Africa Southwest Africa, from Germany 1915, independent 1990 (Namibia)Swaziland, 1890, independent 1968 Basutoland, 1868, independent 1966 (Lesotho)Bechuanaland, 1885, independent 1966 (Botswana)Mosambique, former Portuguese colony, joins Commonwealth 1995 East Africa Kenya, 1887, independent 1963 Tananyika, from Germany 1917, independent 1961 (Tanzania 1964)Zanzibar, 1890, independent 1963 (Tanzania 1964)Uganda, 1888, independent 1962 Rhodesia & Nyasaland Northern Rhodesia, 1889, independent 1964 (Zambia)Southern Rhodesia, 1888, revolt 1965-1980 (Rhodesia), independent 1980 (Zimbabwe)Nyasaland, 1889, independent 1964 (Malawi)British Somaliland, 1884, to Somalia 1960 Eritrea, 1941-1952, to Ethiopia 1952
West Africa Sierra Leone, 1787, independent 1961 Gold Coast, 1662, independent 1957 (Ghana)The Gambia, 1661, independent 1965 Nigeria, 1861, independent 1960 Cameroon, former German colony & French mandate, joins Commonwealth 1995 British Cameroon, from Germany 1919, to Nigeria & Cameroon 1961 St. Helena & Dependencies St. Helena Island, 1659 Ascension Island, 1815 Tristan da Cunha Group Tristan da Cunha Island, 1816 Inaccessible Island Nightingale Island Gough (Diego Alvarez) Island Falkland Islands, 1765 South Sandwich Islands, 1775, separate from Falklands 1985 South Georgia, 1775, separate from Falklands 1985 British Antarctic Territory South Shetland Islands South Orkney Islands Antarctic Peninsula The 81.9K animated GIF file on this page was originally 226.2K in size.
The present 81.9K image is one that is redone using some of the techniques I found in Sven's version.
Lloyd, The Short Oxford History of the Modern World, general editor J.M. Roberts, Oxford, 1996 Castles of Steel -- Britain, Germany, and the Winning of the Great War at Sea, by Robert K. Massie, Random House, 2003 Crucible of War, The Seven Years' War and the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754-1766, Fred Anderson, Alfred A. Knopf, 2000 Dreadnought -- Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War, by Robert K. Massie, Random House, 1991 Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for Global Power, Niall Ferguson, Basic Books, 2004 End of Empire, by Brian Lapping, St. Martin's Press, 1985 Great Battles of the Royal Navy, as Commemorated in the Gunroom, Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, editor-in-chief Eric Grove, Naval Institute Press, 1994 The Horizon History of the British Empire, edited by Stephen W. Sears, American Heritage Publishing/BBC/Time-Life Books/McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1973 Jutland, An analysis of the fighting, by NJM Campbell, Naval Institute Press, 1986 The Oxford History of the British Empire The Origins of Empire, Nicholas Canny, Oxford, 1998 The Eighteenth Century, P.J. Roger Louis and Judith M. Brown, Oxford, 2001 Historiography, Robin Winks, Oxford, 1999 The Oxford History of the British Empire, Companion Series Australia's Empire, Deryck Schreuder and Stuart Ward, 2008 Missions and Empire, Norman Etherington, 2005 Ireland and the British Empire, Kevin Kenny, 2006 Black Experience and the Empire, Philip D. Morgan and Sean Hawkins, 2006 Gender and Empire, Philippa Levine, 2007 Environment and Empire, William Beinart and Lotte Hughes, 2009 Migration and Empire, Marjory Harper, 2010 Anglicanism and the British Empire, c.1700-1850, Rowan Strong, 2007 Slavery and the British Empire, From Africa to America, Kenneth Morgan, 2008 Canada and the British Empire, Phillip Buckner 2008 Scotland and the British Empire, John M. Mac Kenzie and T. M. Devine, 2012 The Oxford Illustrated History of Britain, edited by Kenneth O. Morgan, Oxford, 1984 The Oxford Illustrated History of the Royal Navy, general editor J.R. Hill, Oxford, 1995 The Penguin Historical Atlas of the British Empire, Nigel Dalziel, Penguin, 2006 The Pax Britannica Trilogy, by James (later Jan) Morris, Harvest/HBJ/Helen Kurt Wolff Book Heaven's Command, An Imperial Progress, 1973 Pax Britannica, the Climax of an Empire, 1968 Farewell the Trumpets, an Imperial Retreat, 1978 The Rise and Fall of the British Empire, Lawrence James, St. Martin's Griffin, 1994 The Royal Navy, An Illustrated History, by Anthony J. Watts, Naval Institute Press, 1994 To Rule the Waves, How the British Navy Shaped the Modern World, by Arthur Herman, Haper Collins, 2004 Unfinished Empire, The Global Expansion of Britain, by John Darwin, Bloomsbury Press, 2012
