As an archaeologist, his main interests are in Britain and Europe (1200 to 1800 A.D., particularly castles and traditional houses) and archaeological theory.
Earlier this month he gave a lecture at Loyola University in New Orleans on “How Castles Work”.
There is a temptation in landscape archaeology to obsess about this field boundary or that trackway or those humps and bumps or this lovely church or those houses.
It’s very easy to forget that the one true end of archaeology is to understand and account for humans in the past.
The first thing I do with my students from Northwestern, when we stand in front of an English landscape, is to get them to look at and describe very carefully (and in very simple terms) what they think they are seeing, before we move on to what it all might mean.
The questions that have most preoccupied me in the past revolve around the transition from medieval to early modern rural landscapes, which one might gloss as about the move from feudal to nascent capitalist forms of agricultural and social organization.
I have tried to trace this shift not just in the fields, but also in the changing forms of houses great and small.
But one of the challenges of landscape archaeology is its infinite regression – you can’t understand how for example open-field landscapes changed with postmedieval enclosure unless you look at different forms of field system and their distribution, which entails going back to the early Middle Ages and even further back to the prehistoric and Roman periods.
You just presented a lecture about ‘How Castles work’.
What are you finding in your research that tells a different story about the function of castles?
What I and others have argued in the last couple of decades is that the military view of castles is not wrong, but that it is only part of the story.
They acted as a backdrop for some of the most complex and meaningful activities in medieval society – the hunt, feasting in the great hall, the exercise of lordship and of justice.
Castles were surrounded by elaborate designed landscapes, landscapes that carefully manipulated different views of and from the castle.
In my talk ‘How Castles Work’, I’m trying to take this debate to another level.
You focus on Bodiam Castle, which is one of England’s most iconic medieval buildings.
Charles Coulson and others questioned the nature of the licence, seeing it rather as a largely honorific document, and questioned in detail whether the architecture of the castle could be militarily effective.
It’s also been suggested that the castle was surrounded by an elaborate designed landscape, in which people approached the castle along causeways flanked by sheets of water.
I’ve been working at Bodiam with teams from Northwestern University and the University of Southampton, in partnership with the National Trust.
Our view is that we need to move beyond the military/social debate and above all see the castle in its local and regional context.
We also need to look beyond the 1380s.
We did a topographical and geophysical survey of the area around the castle and found a landscape of work – traces of iron and/or ceramic production, the mill, millpond and mill leat, the harbour… So the castle and landscape of Bodiam that we are exploring is neither simply an ornamental garden nor simply a defence against the French; it’s a complex multi-period site whose regional context and location is crucial.
Do you have any publications that will be coming out soon where people can read more about your research?
at links to forthcoming articles on Bodiam are posted there.
I’m currently working on a new book on castles which I hope will be out in two to three years!
