Friends of Bruce Castle The support group for Bruce Castle Museum, Archives and Park The Museum and its associated Round Tower is Tottenham's only Grade 1 listed building.
The manor of Tottenham is recorded in the 1086 Domesday Survey, but the name Bruce Castle only became attached when the land came into the ownership of the Scottish House of Bruce.
The oldest parts of the present building date from the 16th century, when it was owned by Sir William Compton, master of Henry VIII's bed-chamber.
Compton's house was modified by successive owners in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries, including Lord Coleraine and Rowland Hill, the inventor of the penny post, who opened a school for boys on the site in 1827. 19th century Ordnance Survey maps show the now-vanished kitchen gardens in the school grounds, which presumably provided food for the schoolboys.
The park was slated for building over after the school closed in 1891, but was saved by a local philanthropist, Joshua Pedley, who took over the rent of the house to allow Tottenham Council to raise the then-enormous sum of £15,000 to buy it.
The building opened as a museum in 1906, and its present collections cover the history of the areas which make up the London Borough of Haringey.
It also houses the archives of the London Borough of Haringey.
The Museum has a wide-ranging schools programme, a lively schedule of family activities, frequently changing exhibitions, and a programme of local history talks.
The 8 hectare park is all that remains of what was once a more extensive estate, and is Haringey's oldest park, opening to the public in 1892.
It was once graced by many stately trees (cedars, chestnuts and a mulberry) with fruit trees on the Church Lane boundary, but only the Great Oak, estimated to be 450-500 years old, remains.
The park has nevertheless been delighting generations of Tottenham residents who have played bowls and tennis, visited funfairs, or simply walked around it and sat in the shade.
There is more information about the building and its occupants in Bruce Castle's Wikipedia entry, while Mysterious Britain and Ireland has a short article on the ghosts that are alleged to haunt the building.