On March 25, 1824, the Convention’s delegates had finished their work and Pedro I “imposed” Brazil’s first Constitution and established himself as Brazil’s first Emperor.
The first two Brazilian law schools were established in São Paulo and Olinda in 1827.
Moreover, during this period, two Emperors, Pedro I and Pedro II, as the descendants of King João VI ruled as head of the executive during consecutive reigns.
The first half of Pedro I and II’s rule is called “the Primeiro Reinado.”
For this part, Pedro I (1822-1831) based his reign in part on a literal imitation of the French restoration constitutions.
In addition to a constitutional monarchy with the emperor as ruler, the first Magna Carta also established, for the first time, the separation of powers as one of its core components.
This fourth branch’s task was to coordinate the three traditional powers in order to stabilize the new constitutional order and maintain the new national identity.
Brazil’s new beginning is also known as the República Velha whereby Brazil ceased its existence as part of an empire and began its history as a Republic.
Indeed, the establishment of federalism, a republican government, and a presidential system each constituted a reflection of the North American Constitution.
The Brazilian Congress then invoked a constitutional Commission on November 22, 1890.
It was revolutionary, but at the same time self-appointed.
The framers were aware that the transition from monarchy to republic had to be completed quickly.
Set out in Article 44, the President was to be elected for a term of four years, although without the possibility of re-election (Article 43).
The 1934 Constitution The 1930 Revolution– resulting from a dispute between the states São Paulo and Minas Gerais – led to Getúlio Vargas being elected President in that same year.
From that moment on, the Constitution went through a series of amendments that fully eliminated its democratic character and then, finally, it was replaced by a new constitution a few years later.
The 1967 Constitution Brazil’s new military government, through its first military President (Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco), enacted the “Fourth Institutional Act” (AI-4) and convoked Congress to vote on and promulgate the new Constitution.
The military government, just like the Vargas’ government, passed a Constitution but did not really act in conformity with its articles and principles.
The 1969 Constitution In 1969 the 1967 Constitution received new wording through an amendment enacted by the military ministers.
12 (AI-12), it permitted a military group to replace the former President after his absence, instead of having the Vice-President do so – which would be the legal and democratic thing to do in any republican nation.
The right of one’s access to justice is provided for in Article 5, section XXXV of the Constitution; it is thus inserted in a comprehensive list of individual rights and guarantees established in Article 5.
