The Napoleonic Wars and Brazilian Independence By Dale Pappas By 1807, many of Europe’s monarchs had waged war on Revolutionary, and later Napoleonic France.
However, one capital that Napoleon had not taken was London, although it had long been an aim of the French emperor’s to decisively defeat France’s traditional foe.
With little hope of defeating a French invasion, Portuguese ministers, including Antonio de Araújo, considered the relocation of the monarchy to the colony of Brazil the best possible option.
Portugal had been allied to Britain in several 18th century conflicts, including the First Coalition against Revolutionary France.
In 1801, Spanish troops led by Manuel de Godoy invaded Portugal and seized several border towns in what became known as the “War of the Oranges.”
In addition to territorial loss, Portugal was forced to close its ports to British goods until peace was made in 1803 and trade between the two resumed.
However, it would not be the last time Portugal was threatened by France and Spain.
Although he was content in partaking in religious ceremonies, João was destined to lead his kingdom in a difficult period in its history.
The French Invasion and the Flight of the Royal Family 1807 Portugal’s opposition to the Continental System led Napoleon to order an invasion.
The Braganzas’ arrival in Brazil marked a new era in Portuguese, Brazilian, and indeed Latin American history as a whole.
The entire royal family managed to escape before Junot’s arrival and thus were spared the humiliation of defeat at the hands of Napoleon.
Unfortunately for the Frenchman, most Portuguese were opposed to his government and were pleased when British troops arrived to drive the French from Portugal.
The British and the Portuguese parliament effectively ruled in place of Dom João until the royal family’s return in 1821, but their Portuguese subjects would no longer welcome them.
[5] However, these early Portuguese settlers found that they were not the only Europeans interested in brazilwood as the French had also arrived in the region.
In the 17th century, Brazil was divided into two states, and two others were soon created.
In response, the capital of the viceroyalty was moved to Rio de Janeiro to be closer to Minas Gerais and offer an outlet to the sea.
Queen Maria was one of many that were alarmed at the outbreak of the French Revolution.
The queen’s fear of a revolt was realized; however it was some of her Brazilian subjects that were responsible.
The members of the conspiracy against Portuguese rule were inspired by French philosophers and the American Revolution.
The city replaced Lisbon as the capital of the Portuguese empire.
Also, the Royal Printing Press was established.
[14] Although Rio and indeed the rest of Brazil benefited from the royal family’s presence, all was not well.
If she could not return to Europe though, Carlota Joaquina had an alternative; she would establish her own kingdom from Spanish territory with Buenos Aires as the capital.
Tension both in Europe and America stemmed from the royal family’s absolute power, as many called for a constitutional monarchy.
The royal family’s troubles continued following the end of the Napoleonic Wars, when the Portuguese demanded their return.
João, the new King of Portugal Brazil and the Algarve hesitated to return to Portugal until he learned of the outbreak of the Liberal Revolution of 1820, which originated in the city of Porto.
Dom Pedro and Independence 1821-1822The man that would play a key role in obtaining Brazilian independence, and who would consequently become emperor was Dom Pedro.
In his teen years, Dom Pedro was a handsome, daring young man who was known for his affairs with the wives of prominent officials.
King João was unable to exercise any authority in Portugal, as the liberals held power in the Cortes.
In the summer of 1821, Portuguese troops, known as the Legion took power in Rio under their commander General Jorge de Avilez.
The Portuguese government ordered Pedro to return to Portugal, but the crown prince defied the command on what became known as the Dia do Fico, meaning, “I will remain.”
[19] The Legion was not pleased by Pedro’s answer to the government.
Dom Pedro surrounded de Avilez and ordered his troops to return to Portugal.
While on his tour, Pedro was met by a messenger who informed the crown prince that the Portuguese government was opposed to an independent Brazil and that troops would be sent to restore order.
In 1824, a national constitution was introduced, solidifying the government as a constitutional monarchy under Dom Pedro.
The History of Brazil.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Liberators: Latin America’s Struggle for Independence.
Levine, Robert M. The History of Brazil.
Dom Pedro:
The Struggle for Liberty in Brazil and Portugal, 1798-1834.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1976.
Tropical Versailles: Empire, Monarchy, and the Portuguese Royal Court in Rio de Janeiro, 1808-1821.
Dom Pedro.
Dom Pedro.
Dom Pedro.
The History of Brazil.
Dom Pedro.
[22] Levine, Robert M. The History of Brazil.
