Primarily we are thinking of political emancipation from colonial status; involved also are assumptions about the democratization of internal politics, or at least their liberalization; thus we expect a defeat of despotism and the emergence of some sort of institutional formula to express the popular will, essential for the legitimacy of any new state.
Yet the truth is, that in the case of Brazil’s independence, almost all these charges against the new regime can be made, and indeed they were made at the time.
Brazil, for example, was at the time of its independence from Portugal already 322 years old; and in the year 2000 its experience as a nation free from formal European domination will still be far shorter than was its colonial life.
Yet in Latin America this “colonial persistence” was unlike that inherited by many of the post colonial states that emerged out of the European empires in Asia and Africa during the mid twentieth century.
Historians who were not part of a Marxist tradition also took a similar view: Robinson and Gallagher, for instance, saw the independence of the Latin American nations as the classic example of the shift from formal to informal imperialism.3Yet British interests in Portugal and Brazil were not monolithic.
In effect, as in the mid seventeenth century, Portugal and later Brazil were obliged to balance the need for autonomy against the need for political and military support, especially in their relations with Great Britain, the dominant naval and economic power.
In Brazil this was especially the case in the matter of the slave trade.
As Sidney Mintz has argued, the industrial revolution in Britain (and in the northern states of North America, for that matter) helped revive slavery throughout the Americas by creating a vast new urban consumer market for products such as coffee and sugar, as well as by creating the enormous demand for raw cotton to supply the textile mills of both old and new England.
And it was not only merchants in Rio de Janeiro or Bahia who were financing the illegal slave trade or the legal commerce in cotton, coffee, and sugar that depended on slave labor.
Gentlemen, continually our domestic enemies grow; and they have nothing to lose; except above all to hope for a revolution such as that of Santo Domingo.”
In other words, to hope for a new Haitian revolution in Brazil.8IIIThe ambiguity of Brazil’s passage from colony to imperial center to independent nation is best exemplified on the one hand by the aborted plans for reform put forward by José Bonifácio, and on other in the enigmatic Dom Pedro, first emperor of Brazil after the break from Portugal.
He had been a brilliant student at the reformed University of Coimbra in Portugal and arrived in Paris in 1790 as a post-graduate student supported by a grant from the Portuguese government brokered by the Secretary of the new Lisbon Academy of Sciences, the Abbé Corrêa da Serra.
His role as portrayed in Portuguese history is that of the upholder of “constitutionalism,” an image totally incompatible with his image in Brazilian history, where he was the ruler who rejected Brazil’s first constitution as too liberal and exiled José Bonifácio and his brothers, the leaders of the small minority of Brazilians who wanted fundamental reform and who had provided the direction during the most critical moments of the transition to independence It is therefore vital to recognize that on 7th September 1822, when Dom Pedro stopped at the banks of the Ipiranga river near São Paulo, suffering from a bout of diarrhea, and cried out it was to be “Independence or Death”; the young prince and heir apparent to the Portuguese throne was exaggerating.
But John Quincy Adams, the U.S. Secretary of State, was not alone in quite misunderstanding the occasion and its significance when he told Ceasar Rodney on his appointment as U.S. Minister to Buenos Aires that “in Brazil … an empire probably as ephemeral as that of Mexico at our door has taken the place of Portugal.”
What was really at stake in 1822 was a question of monarchy, stability, continuity, and territorial integrity.
Henry Chamberlain, British minister in Rio de Janeiro in 1824, was ever concerned that the social turmoil under the surface in Brazil and evident on the streets and in the constituent assembly in Rio would, as he put it:excite … such a flame … as it might not be possible to control, and would perhaps end in the destruction of the imperial government and the division of the country into a variety of small independent republican states, wretched in themselves and the cause of wretchedness amongst their neighbours, such as we have witnessed in the Spanish American colonies in our neighbourhood.9Portugal’s major European allies—both Britain as well as the members of the Holy Alliance—were quite clear on this point, as George Canning, the British Foreign Secretary who had previously served as British envoy in Lisbon, wrote very succinctly in 1824:
The only question is whether Brazil, independent of Portugal, shall be a monarchy or a Republic.
From that period began a series of relaxations first, and afterwards of concessions of privileges, which gradually exalted the condition of Brazil and almost inverted its relations with Portugal so as to make, during the residence of His Most Faithful Majesty in Brazil, the mother country in fact a Dependency.11Dom João, the prince regent, soon to be Dom João VI on the death of his demented mother in 1816, had said as much to Thomas Sumpter Jr., the U.S. envoy in Rio de Janeiro in 1815, “The times have been difficult but now the independence of Brazil is fixed.”
12The important point about Brazil, therefore, is that it became economically and politically emancipated between 1808 and 1820 while acting as the center of the Luso-Brazilian Empire.
Justice is administered from Brazil to the loyal people in Europe, that is to say at a vast distance … with excessive expense and delay...
[italics added]13IVBut if the “anti-colonial” revolution occurred in Oporto not in Rio de Janeiro, the interesting questions from the Brazilian perspective are: Was the will for independence in Brazil sufficiently strong to have achieved this outcome if the liberal revolution had not occurred in Oporto in 1820, if the Portuguese Cortes once convened had not forced the king to return to Europe; was the anti-monarchist sentiment within Brazil strong enough to have provoked a republican movement, such as those in North America and in much of Spanish America which rejected both monarchy and European rule?
So the answer to these questions is probably “no.”
In other words, the social base for radical change was stronger and opposition to it weaker in Portugal in 1820, than was the case in Brazil, and the reason for this is that in all ways continuity was greater in Brazil than it was in Portugal during the first two decades of the nineteenth century.
And it should also be emphasized that the slave revolt in Haiti had dramatic impact not only because the balance of social and racial tensions within Brazil and elsewhere in the Americas made its example frightening to whites, but because of its intrinsic importance.
He is a member of every philosophical society in the world and he knows every distinguished man living.”
17 Jefferson was equally impressed.
In their discussions at Monticello, Jefferson and the Abbé Corrêa first traced their “American system.”
Jefferson wrote of the Abbé in 1820:From many conversations with him, I hope he sees and will promote in his new situation [the Abbé had been recalled to Rio de Janeiro and Jefferson assumed he would become the Minister of External Affairs] the advantages of a cordial fraternization among all the American nations, and the importance of their coalescing in an American system of policy, totally independent of and unconnected with that of Europe.
The day is not distant, when we may formally require a meridian partition through the ocean which separates the two Hemispheres, on the hither side of which no European gun shall ever be heard, nor an American on the other; and when during the rage of the eternal wars of Europe, the lion and the lamb within our regions, shall lie down together in peace.
It was he, of course, not Monroe or Jefferson, who was to have the most influence over U.S. foreign policy toward the newly independent nations of South America, both as Secretary of State between 1817 and 1825 and as President from 1825 to 1829.
John Quincy Adams saw the merits of separation from Europe, but he did not think this implied any mutual identity between the United States and the new nations to its South.
But he wanted as little to do with them as possible.
He, like Jefferson, knew the Abbé Corrêa well, and thought him a man of “extensive general literature, of profound science, of brilliant wit, and of inexhaustible powers of conversation.”
But Adams also found Corrêa “quick, sensitive, fractious, hasty and when excited obstinate.”
He ridiculed the Abbé Corrêa’s
[and Thomas Jefferson’s] suggestion that Brazil and the United States create an “American system.”
With the disdain and arrogance that was also to characterize U.S. attitudes toward Latin America for the next century, John Quincy Adams wrote: “As to an American system we have it; we constitute the whole of it.”
20VIIn Brazil, however, the internal threat to stability and territorial integrity was not only a question of unfounded or unrealized fears, such a threat had come to fruition prior to 1822 in one very important test case: Pernambuco.
The provisional government had expected support from the United States and France—Jefferson’s friend, the Abbé Corrêa, had worked mightily in Washington to thwart Pernambuco’s representatives and frustrate the merchants of Baltimore who were helping them—but it was Britain that really mattered.22 British influence over the central government in Rio de Janeiro, however, offered much greater opportunities than did the encouragement of separatist revolts.
British policy too was strongly influenced by the slave trade.
The separation Britain was less reluctant to support was that between Brazil and the Portuguese enclaves in Africa.
As independent and sovereign nations, the slave trade between them and South America became internationalized and open to suppression by the British Navy on the high seas.
As soon as these begin to produce this effect, the necessity for the African supply will gradually diminish, and I hope in a few years a stop will be put to it for ever….
Were the abolition to come upon them before they were prepared for it, the whole country would be convulsed from one end to the other, and there is no calculating the consequences to the Government or to the country itself.
We know that as long as it is carried on and a state of slavery continued in the country, that real sound industry cannot take root, that a vigorous prosperity cannot exist, that our population is unsound, and so fully are we persuaded of these truths that were it possible, we would at once abolish both.24These objections to slavery were not, it must be emphasized, so much the result of “humanitarian” or “philanthropic” sentiment, as they were in Europe, but were more similar to the objections to slavery in the United States in the same period, and were a response to the perception that the racial balance of the population was potentially and dangerously unstable, or would impede the growth of a nation on an European model.
Those few who urged eventual emancipation of the slaves, such as José Bonifácio, did so not because of the humanity of slaves, but because they wished to see Brazil europeanized, not only in terms of aspirations, institutions, and national purpose, but also in terms of the composition of its population.
And over the question of slavery it was the patriarch of American independence, Thomas Jefferson, who equivocated, not the patriarch of Brazil’s independence, José Bonifácio.
José da Silva Lisboa, who had urged the opening of the Brazilian ports to the Prince Regent in 1808, argued in 1818 that the progress of São Paulo was due “to extraordinary preponderance [there] of the white race.”
Rio Grande do Sul, the granary of Brazil as he called it, likewise, had been colonized by “the Portuguese race, and not the Ethiopian population.”
Taking the example of Madeira, he asserted that “experience had shown that once the supply of Africans has been cut off, the race does not decrease and decline but becomes better and whiter…”
He went on to ask: “Was the best area in America to be populated by the offspring of Africa or of Europe?”
To avoid “the horrid spectacle of the catastrophe that reduced the Queen of the Antilles [Haiti, that is] to a Madagascar,” Brazil should be prevented from becoming a “Negroland.”
He wished to see the cancer of slavery eliminated from the Rio de la Plata to the Amazon.26The question of slavery thus raised fundamental questions about the most desirable course for Brazilian development, questions as to the type of society, state, legal system, and government Brazil as an independent state would adopt.
In this context, reformers like José Bonifácio were double victims.
The population we want is a white one, and I soon hope to see arrive here from Europe in shoals the poor, the wretched, the industrious; here they will find plenty, with a fine climate; here they will be happy; such are the colonists we want.27VIITo feed this Atlantic system and to sustain its economic organization of production, however, one thing was clear: Brazil did not need Portugal.
Not only was Dom João VI forced to return to Lisbon, but the Cortes soon legislated the end to many of the powers that he had granted to his eldest son, Dom Pedro, who had been left in Rio as Regent.
It was against this background that Dom Pedro defied the instructions of the Cortes to return to Europe, accepted the title “Perpetual Defender of Brazil” from the Municipal Council of Rio de Janeiro in early 1822, and then, on September 7, 1822, made his declaration of “independence” on the outskirts of São Paulo.
The alternative model for Brazilian development, in which European immigration and free laborers would replace slavery, was not to be, at least as long as emperors ruled in Rio de Janeiro; and, as a consequence, the slave trade continued until mid-century, slavery until the 1880s.
So I hope that by highlighting some of the multiple contexts within which Brazil became an independent nation, I also may have gone some way towards demonstrating why Brazil was different, and why it is high time historians took a fresh look in a comparative framework at this fascinating and complex transition.
2, 115-158; “Apontamentos para a Civilização do Indios Bravos do Império do Brasil, ibid, vol. (London and New York: Oxford University Press, 1938).
12 Thomas Sumter Jr., U.S. Minister to the Portuguese Court in Brazil, to James Monroe, Secretary of State, Rio de Janeiro, 29 December, 1815, in William R. Manning, ed., Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States Concerning the Independence of the Latin American Nations, 3 Vols., (New York: Oxford University Press; 1925-[1926]), II, 696-700.
Kenneth Maxwell, “The Generation of the 1790s and the Idea of a Luso-Brazilian Empire,” in The Colonial Roots of Modern Brazil, ed.
