Appleby Castle, Appleby-in-Westmorland, Cumbria Owned by: Privately owned Intact Norman Castle and mansion house.
Now a private residence it is not open to the public.
Founded by Roger de Montgomery in 1067, the castle was damaged during the English Civil War and restored throughout the 18th and 19th centuries.
Most of the castle and grounds are open to the public; entrance charges apply to both the castle and gardens.
It was captured by the Scots in 1315, seized by English rebels two years later, and again occupied by Scots in 1346.
Baconsthorpe Castle, Nr Holt, Norfolk Owned by: English Heritage Ruined moated and fortified 15th century manor house.
After the English Civil War the house fell into ruin.
Open to the public, entrance charges apply.
Bellister Castle, Haltwhistle, Northumberland Owned by: National Trust Remains of a 19th century mansion house attached to the ruins of a 14th century tower house.
This ruined castellated 19th century mansion house and remains of a 14th century tower house stand on what may have been an earlier motte and bailey castle.
Although owned by the National Trust, the structures are not open to the public; the castle exterior however, can be viewed from adjacent properties.
Home to the Middleton family, a new manor house was added to the tower in 1614.
The castle was abandoned by the family in the early 19th century.
Extended in the mid-12th century, the castle was besieged in 1216 during the civil war between King John and rebel barons.
It is reputed to be one of the most haunted castles in Britain.
Berwick Castle, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland Owned by: English Heritage Remains of a medieval castle and the most complete bastioned town defences in England.
Built in the 12th century by the Scottish King David I, the English King Edward I had the castle rebuilt and added the substantial town walls of Berwick.
Built on the site of a Roman fort, this was once owned by King Edward IV who gifted it to his brother, the Duke of Gloucester, in the early 1400's.
Most of the original gatehouse still remains.
Later converted into a family residence, it remained occupied until 1857.
Remains of a 14th century pele tower within a demolished 19th-century country mansion.
Open access at any time.
Originally a large fortified manor house, all that remains of Boarstall Castle today is its moated gatehouse dating back to 1312.
Slighted during the Civil War, it again fell into a ruinous state.
Mary, Queen of Scots was held at the castle following her defeat at the Battle of Langside in 1568.
Extensive earthworks of a grand 11th century Norman motte and bailey castle.
Attacked and destroyed by the Scots in 1174, it was later rebuilt using stone with the addition of a square keep.
Brougham Castle, Nr Penrith, Cumbria Owned by: English Heritage Remains of medieval castle.
Built by Robert de Vieuxpont in the early 13th century on the site of an earlier Roman fort, the castle sits on the banks of the River Eamont.
The curtain wall and tower have been incorporated into the 19th century house, which is privately owned and not normally open to visitors.
This 11th century Norman motte and bailey castle was built by Nigel d'Aubigny, sometime after the Norman Invasion of 1066.
The castle fell into fell into disrepair in the 17th century, when a new house was built nearby.
Restricted summer opening times and entrance charges apply, to both the castle and adjacent motor museum.
Camber Castle, Rye, East Sussx Owned by: English Heritage Ruin of an artillery fort, built by Henry VIII.
Built by Henry VIII to guard the port of Rye, Camber was built as part of a chain of coastal defences to protect England's coast from foreign invasion, following Henry's decision to break from the Roman Catholic Church.
The circular tower was built between 1512-1514 and expanded between 1539-1544.
By the 17th century it had fallen into ruin.
Although there has been a fortress on this site since at least Saxon times AD 544, the present stone castle was started around 1100.
Following his defeat in the English Civil War, King Charles I was imprisoned at the castle for fourteen months before his execution in 1649.
Carlisle Castle, Carlisle, Cumbria Owned by: English Heritage Remains of a Norman castle.
The castle was started during the reign of William II of England, the son of the Conqueror, at which time Cumberland was considered a part of Scotland.
A wooden Norman motte and bailey castle was started in 1093 on the site of an earlier Roman fort.
In 1122, Henry I ordered a stone keep to be constructed; the city walls also date from this time.
Originally built as a pele tower in the 14th century, it was extended to include a great hall and courtyard in 1442.
During the English Civil War Cartington was held by royalist troops; as a result it was besieged by Parliamentary forces in 1648.
Castle Acre Castle, Nr Swaffham, Norfolk Owned by: English Heritage Remains of a Norman motte and bailey castle.
One of two castles in Kendal, Castle Howe was built shortly after the Norman conquest of England.
Of a motte and bailey design, the castle was abandoned in the 12th century.
One of the most famous 12th century castles in England, the well preserved stone keep is amongst the finest surviving examples of its kind and is surrounded by 12 acres of earthwork defences.
Built during the 11th century, this timber motte and bailey castle had been abandoned by the 13th century.
The original wooden motte and bailey castle was rebuilt in stone in the 12th century along with the outer bailey.
Open to the public from Easter and through October, restricted opening times and entrance charges apply.
Standing on the site of an earlier Saxon fort dating from around AD 924, the original Norman wooden motte and bailey castle was replaced with a stone keep in 1160.
A motte and bailey castle was built shortly after the Norman Conquest by Richard Fitz Gilbert, cousin of William the Conqueror.
The stone keep is enclosed within a curtain wall, only part of which remains.
There is free open access to the castle and a small admission fee to the museum.
Built to defend the unsettled border country between Wales and England shortly after the Norman Conquest in 1066, the first motte and bailey castle at Clun was constructed of wood.
Attacked and burned down by the Welsh in 1196, it was completely rebuilt in the late 13th century in stone by the Fitzallan family.
The castle was converted into a hunting lodge sometime in the 14th century, but by the 16th century it was largely ruined.
Today, the remains include the grand four-storey stone keep and a curtain wall with free open access at any reasonable time.
In 1922, the Castle and parkland were gifted to the town and now serves as a public museum.
Fortified by earthworks, the first castle on the site would have been little more than a wooden palisade, built soon after the Norman Conquest by William of Warenne.
Originally built in the 13th century as a red sandstone Pele Tower by the Salkeld family, the fortified tower was sold to Lord William Howard in 1611, who added a 2 storey house.
In 1635, the castle was sold to Sir John Bankes, who owned it during the English Civil War.
The site of one of the first Norman motte and bailey castles to be erected by William the Conqueror following his invasion of 1066.
During the Civil War the castle was besieged and subsequently taken by the Royalists, who held on to it for three years before it was re-taken by the Parliamentarians in 1646.
Extensive earthworks mark the site of this 11th century Norman motte and bailey castle.
In the late 12th century it was involved in the struggle between King Richard and his brother Prince John, but by the end of the 13th century there appears to have been little left.
First built as a Norman motte and bailey castle in 1080 by Osmund, Bishop of Salisbury, it was rebuilt in stone in 1120 after the wooden structure burned down.
Before it was demolished in 1646, both King Henry VIII and Queen Elizabeth I visited the castle.
Dover Castle, Dover, Kent Owned by: English Heritage Intact medieval castle.
The adjacent Anglo-Saxon church was once part of a Saxon fortified settlement that was converted by William the Conqueror into a Norman earthwork and timber motte and bailey castle.
One of the first fortified castles built by William the Conqueror in 1072, part of his plan to subjugate the northern part of his new kingdom.
Public access is restricted to guided tours.
Built on the site of an earlier Danish fort, the present motte and bailey castle was built by William de Meschines between 1120 and 1135.
Built by Robert de Umfraville shortly after the Norman Conquest, this motte and bailey castle is said to be one of the best preserved in Northumberland.
Also in the village is Elsdon Tower, a late 14th or early 15th century pele or tower house.
Parts of the house and the gardens are open to the public.
Originally built by William Malet in 1186, this 11th century motte and bailey castle was further fortified with the addition of a 12th century curtain wall.
Following The Anarchy, the original motte and bailey castle was demolished by Henry II in 1155 and rebuilt again in the late 12th century.
The castle was slighted again after the English Civil War in 1648 and the keep abandoned, but much-altered parts of the medieval bishops' residence remain.
Although there is no public access to the ruins, it can be viewed from the nearby road.
An early motte and bailey Norman castle occupied the site by 1148, but this was destroyed by King Henry II following the revolt of 1173-4.
The wooden structure was rebuilt in stone in 1129, and further extended in the 14th century when King Edward III granted permission to castellate the tower.
In 1737 a courthouse was built on the site which also operated as a prison.
Hartshill Castle, Warwickshire Owned by: Scheduled Ancient Monument Remains of 12th century motte with ruins of 14th century curtain wall.
An earth and timber Norman motte and bailey castle was built on this site by Hugh de Hardreshull in 1125.
It was rebuilt in stone by John de Hardreshull in 1330.
Originally constructed from wood by the Hylton (Hilton) family shortly after the Norman Conquest of 1066, this fortified manor house was rebuilt in stone around 1400.
Built around 1200 as the home of the barons of Kendal, the castle later became home to Parr family.
Although parts of the original Tudor manor house can still be seen, the majority of the castle was built between 1690 and 1720.
Originally built during the reign of Henry I between 1100 and 1135, the Tudor manor house that now occupies the site was home to the powerful Vaughan family.
Occupying the site of a former Roman fort overlooking a crossing of the River Lune, a wooden Saxon fort was demolished in order to make way for this Norman castle, built around 1088 by Roger de Poitou.
Set on a large natural mound controlling the strategic crossing of the River Tamar, a wooden motte and bailey castle was erected shortly after the Norman Conquest, possibly as early as 1067.
Built by William de Warenne around 1069, the first fortification on the site was a wooden keep which was later converted to stone.
Constructed by order of William the Conqueror on the site of a pre-existing Roman fortress, the castle was started in 1068, just two years after the Norman Conquest.
One of the first structures on the site was the Lucy Tower motte and bailey, to which another motte and stone walls were added early in the 12th century.
Middleham Castle, Middleham, Yorkshire Owned by: English Heritage Extensive remains of medieval fortified palace.
The childhood home of King Richard III, the castle remained in royal hands until the reign of James I, when it was sold.
That early structure was demolished in 1215, and a second castle was built on the same site in the early 14th century.
The oldest part of the castle is the pele tower, which dates from the early 1300s.
Restricted opening times and entrance charges apply to the castle, gardens and Owl Centre.
Naworth Castle, Cumbria Owned by: Howard family Intact medieval castle.
Now a private family home, the castle is only available to hire for exclusive events and is not open to the public.
Re-built in stone by King Henry II around 1175, the Black Gate was added by Henry III between 1247 and 1250.
The stone keep which stands today, was built some 60 years later.
Used as a gaol between 1220 and 1887, the castle was bought by the city of Norwich to be used as a museum.
Damaged by cannon fire during the English Civil War the castle fell into ruins, although it is still considered by many as "aesthetically the most impressive castle in Somerset. "
The Great Hall is all that remains of the early medieval fortified manor house, although in its heyday it did feature a curtain wall, gatehouse with drawbridge, towers and a moat.
Built by Baldwin Fitz Gilbert shortly after the Norman conquest of England, this early motte and bailey type fortification was constructed to control strategic crossings and approaches; the castle guards a crossing point across the West Okement River.
The castle fell out of use some years later and was sold for materials by Henry VIII.
Old Wardour Castle, Tisbury, Wiltshire Owned by: English Heritage Remains of 14th century as a lightly fortified castle.
Built by Robert d'Oilly in 1071, the original wooden motte and bailey castle was rebuilt in stone during the 11th century.
The oldest part of the castle is the pele tower, which dates from the late 1300s.
Shortly after the Conquest a full-scale Norman castle, with a great square keep and a powerful gatehouse, was built within the Roman fort.
The castle was besieged in the Rebellion of 1088 and again later during a period of civil war known as The Anarchy.
The original wooden fortress was soon rebuilt in stone and was used in 1157 for a meeting between Henry I and King Malcolm of Scotland.
First constructed as a Norman timber and earth motte and bailey castle around 1070, this was rebuilt in stone between 1180 and 1187, with later fortifications added in the 11th and 12th centuries.
First constructed as a Norman timber and earth motte and bailey castle by Ilbert de Lacy around 1070, this was rebuilt in stone shortly after.
Built in the late 14th century and early 15th century, Powderham Castle was badly damaged during the Civil War although it was repaired in the early 18th century by Sir William Courtenay.
Prudhoe Castle, Prudhoe, Northumberland Owned by: English Heritage Well preserved remains of medieval castle and Georgian mansion.
Constructed shortly after the Norman Conquest of England, the original motte and bailey fortification was started sometime in the mid-11th century, to guard a ford across the River Tyne.
Originally built to protect England's northern borders with Scotland, it was later rebuilt and strengthened using local stone, with a curtain wall and gatehouse added.
One of only 48Â castles mentioned in the Domesday Survey of 1086 and the only one in the county of Essex, it remained in use until the 13th century.
Once a luxurious residence of the Earl of Cornwall, it became ruined in the years after the English Civil War.
Built shortly after the Norman Conquest, the original castle was started around 1071.
The first wooden motte and bailey structure built shortly after the Norman Invasion of England was quickly replaced with a stone castle.
Rose Castle, Cumbria Owned by: Privately owned Fortified house.
Thought to have been built on a much earlier motte and bailey, some parts of Rose Castle still date back to the 14th century although most of structure is from the 1800s and 1900s.
The castle was also the home of the bishops of Carlisle from 1230 to 2009.
The castle appears to have fallen from royal favour in the centuries that followed and by 1775 was being used as a debtors' prison.
Garrisoned by Royalist troops during the first part of the English Civil War (1642-6), it was in ruins by 1684.
Built shortly after the Norman Conquest, the original castle was started around 1107.
The castle has been a ruin since the sieges of the English Civil War, between 1642 and 1648.
Originally built as a fortified house with towers in each corner, it was rebuilt in Elizabethan style in 1580 and again in 1630.
The oldest parts of the castle were built by the 1st Earl of Shrewsbury, Roger de Montgomery, shortly after the Norman Conquest.
Around 1300 during his conflicts with the Welsh, Edward I greatly enlarged the castle, but it gradually fell into disuse following his invasion of Wales.
Someries Castle, Hyde, Bedfordshire, England Owned by: Scheduled Ancient Monument Ruined remains of fortified manor house.
All that remains of the original house is a set of earthworks.
Open all year, free entrance.
Built by Odo Fitzhubert, Bishop of Bayeux shortly after the Norman conquest of England, the first fortification on the site was a wooden keep which was later converted to stone.
Although the site has been fortified since Anglo-Saxon times, the current Norman motte and bailey castle dates from the 11th century.
During the English Civil War, the castle was captured by parliamentary forces after a brief siege.
Erected on top of an earlier Iron Age hillfort, the first castle on the site was built around 1067, immediately following the Norman Conquest of England.
Now part of a local park, there is free and open access at any reasonable time.
Although the site appears to have been occupied during the Iron Age, Roman and Saxon periods, the current motte and bailey fortification may have been built by King Stephen during his 12th century civil war with Empress Maud, known as The Anarchy.
Although surrounded by more ancient remains, it is thought that the current castle was the work of Richard, Earl of Cornwall (brother to King Henry III).
Well preserved remains of motte and bailey gatehouse.
In 1088 the castle was besieged by King William II.
Rebuilt in stone some years later by the de Clare family, the castle was further reinforced during the 13th century, and in 1295 a stone wall was built around the town.
As with most motte and bailey castles, all that remains today is a set of earthworks.
At the time, London was the largest town in England and centre of governance with a prosperous port.
Most of the early Norman castles were constructed in wood, but by the end of the 11th century many had been rebuilt using stone.
Started in 1087, the White Tower was the earliest stone keep to be built in England.
Seat of the de Ferrers family, the early motte and bailey castle was first recorded in 1071, shortly after the Norman Conquest of England.
Restricted opening times to the public during summer months.
The original wooden castle was rebuilt in stone in the 12th century and fortified further during the Hundred Years War.
The de Criol family were responsible for building the fortified manor house on the site in 1343, and it remained with the family until the War of the Roses when Sir Thomas de Criol was beheaded.
By the mid-17th century it was one of the largest houses in Kent, however shortly after this it started to fall in to disrepair.
Although added to and improved in the mid-14th century, the castle gradually fell into disrepair so that by 1392 it was declared to be 'utterly in ruins'.
Free and open access at restricted times and dates.
There is free and open access all year round to the castle grounds.
Slighted during the English Civil War, the castle fell into decay and eventual ruin.
A more modern manor was built in the 19th century, which remains a residence today.
Restricted summer open days and entrance charges apply.
Built by the Bishop of Winchester Henry of Blois between 1130 and 1140, the early Norman keep and bailey castle was quickly extended and further fortified during the Civil War between Queen Matilda and King Stephen, known as The Anarchy.
