The Book Of Kells and Trinity College Trinity College is known in full as the College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity of Queen Elizabeth near Dublin, is a research university and the sole constituent college of the University of Dublin in Ireland.
The college was founded in 1592 as the “mother” of a new university, modelled after the collegiate universities of Oxford and of Cambridge, but, unlike these, only one college was ever established; as such, the designations “Trinity College” and “University of Dublin” are usually synonymous for practical purposes.
It is one of the seven ancient universities of Britain and Ireland, as well as Ireland’s oldest university.
The Book of Kells is the most famous of the volumes in the Trinity College Library.
The Book of Kells is an illuminated manuscript Gospel book in Latin, containing the four Gospels of the New Testament together with various prefatory texts and tables.
It was created in a Columbian monastery in either Britain or Ireland or may have had contributions from various Columbian institutions from both Britain and Ireland.
It is believed to have been created ca.
800 AD.
The text of the Gospels is largely drawn from the Vulgate, although it also includes several passages drawn from the earlier versions of the Bible known as the Vetus Latina.
It is a masterwork of Western calligraphy and represents the pinnacle of insular illumination.
It is also widely regarded as Ireland’s finest national treasure.
The illustrations and ornamentation of the Book of Kells surpass that of other Insular Gospel books in extravagance and complexity.
The decoration combines traditional Christian iconography with the ornate swirling motifs typical of Insular art.
Figures of humans, animals and mythical beasts, together with Celtic knots and interlacing patterns in vibrant colours, enliven the manuscript’s pages.
Many of these minor decorative elements are imbued with Christian symbolism and so further emphasise the themes of the major illustrations.