Tower House Castles of Medieval Europe Tower of Hallbar, South Lanarkshire, Scotland.
The tower house is one type of castle built during the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The occupants of these buildings called them castles and they are considered a variety of castle within the genre.
Tower Houses in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland The motte and bailey castle was introduced in England after the Norman Conquest.
William began a royal program of castle building for defensive purposes and to house garrisons and supplies.
These were later replaced by castles made of stone with square tower keeps.
Along with the king, greater barons built castles too.
Consequently, more mercenary soldiers were used.
A tower house as one’s home was a symbol of status, power and rank, denoting the owner could look after himself and protect his valuable possessions.
Tower houses began to be built in cities, along the coast and in the Marches and Borders.
There was no forebuilding, it was entered from ground level, and it was more lightly built and for the most part not attached to a larger fortified area.
The ground floor was typically used for storage and sometimes had a separate entrance.
The first floor was usually a hall with a fireplace and private chambers would be on the upper floors.
A winding staircase would be built into the thickness of the wall or would be in a projecting corner tower.
There is scarce evidence for a kitchen or other rooms for storage and preparation of food.
In England the towers were generally annexed to a hall.
There is evidence of other urban towers in Lincoln and Winchester.
Tower houses were a far more numerous and common feature in northern England and the borders where security was an issue.
Some noted examples of tower houses that can still be seen in England include: Sizergh in Cumbria, Arnside Tower in Cumbria, Piel Tower House on the Furness Peninsula, Halloughton in Nottingham, Stokesay Castle in Shropshire, Lympne Castle in Kent, Godlingston Manor in Dorset, Pengersick Castle in Cornwall and Kyme in Lincolnshire just to name a few.
The best surviving tower house of lowland England is Longthorpe Tower in Peterborough, one of the tower houses with an exceptional feature.
Longthorpe is a three story tower that was added to an older house and built between 1290 and 1300 by the Thorpe family, who went from peasants to knights in just three generations.
By 1260 they were knights and had the resources to build a manor at Longthorpe along with a chapel.
Around 1300, the tower was added to the manor as a status symbol.
Photo from geography.org.uk by Julian Dowse The most notable feature of Longthorpe Tower are the remarkable and rare wall paintings on the first floor that date from 1330-1350.
Also some of the houses had, at the corners, corbelled bartizans which were favored by the French.
One of the finest examples of a medieval Scottish tower house is Craigmillar Castle in Edinburgh, built by the wealth Preston family.
Ruins of Craigmillar Castle (Photo by the author)Tower houses exist but are notably rare in Wales and the March.
They were built by the Anglo-Irish as well as Gaelic families during the years 1400 to 1650.
Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Ireland The majority of the castles in Ireland are tower houses.
The idea for them could also have been imported from England, Scotland or the Continent.
One would enter the lobby of the tower and on one side there might be a small porter’s station and on the other a spiral staircase to the upper levels.
Some Irish tower houses had a straight flight of stone steps within the thickness of a side wall instead of a spiral.
The spiral staircase would end at the parapet which consisted of a wall-walk with some crenelation.
Some examples of tower houses in Ireland that still exist are Kinlough Castle in Co. Galway, Dunguire Castle in Co. Galway, Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Bourchiers’ Castle in Co.
There are a few surviving examples of tower houses in Central Europe but one of the best preserved is the ducal tower at Siedlecin in Lower Silesia, Poland.
The most siginificant alteration since the fourteenth century is the addition of a roof in the sixteenth century.
Ducal Tower of Siedlecin (Photo courtesy of rimlightstudio, the tower’s finest interior space is that of the former Great Hall on the second floor.
Today the ducal tower of Siedlecin is the only place in the world where Lancelot paintings have been preserved in situ.
Further reading: “The Medieval Castle in England and Wales: A social and political history: by N.J.G.
