The Terror of Gothic Castles: How Gothic Novels and Gothic Architecture Created Truly Spooky Places Gothic castles have occupied a place in people's imaginations for hundreds of years.
It was a style of architecture which was famed for grand arched buildings with sweeping windows.
Many cathedrals in Europe are 'gothic', and Malbork Castle is an example of gothic architecture.
There was a trend for a new genre of writing - 'gothic' novels.
These were a precursor for the horror stories of today.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
It was a style of architecture which was famed for grand arched buildings with sweeping windows.
Many cathedrals in Europe are 'gothic', and Malbork Castle is an example of gothic architecture.
There was a trend for a new genre of writing - 'gothic' novels.
These were a precursor for the horror stories of today.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
Gothic architecture was a mid-Medieval movement that revolutionised the way that buildings were built.
A new technological development - the flying buttress - meant that it was possible to build taller, wider and grander buildings.
These flying buttresses are a feature of gothic architecture.
Credit: Patrick Gonzales CC-BY-SA-2.0Grand vaulted ceilings.
The ceilings in gothic buildings were made of up grand, pointed arches, which created an interesting, vaulted effect.
These was made possible by the developments above, and ushered in a new age of design, which was dramatically different from the claustrophobic old castles of before.
I've written another page on the characteristics of gothic architecture, if you're keen to find out more.
The vaulted arches are typical of gothic architecture; and the spooky surroundings have been featured in gothic novels and poetry.
Credit: Ioan Sameli CC-BY-2.0This new architectural style was most readily adopted by new cathedrals, churches and abbeys.
However, some castles began to be built in the gothic fashion - Malbork Castle in Poland being the most obvious example.
Evidently, these light, airy and sophisticated gothic designs were a vast step-up from the dark, dank old stone castles of yore.
The skills to build more complex and sophisticated buildings - such as round towers - made castles harder to attack.
Castles as a place of fear and terror: Gothic Castles and the Gothic Novel Dark, secret passageways are a common feature of gothic novels.
Novelist Horace Walpole had written a new type of book altogether, creating a new genre of fiction.
The novels were written to conjure up images of mysterious, decaying old buildings where dark secrets had laid hidden for hundreds of years.
Often, these novels were set in the ruins of old castles.
This meant that castles were often used as a setting in gothic novels.
If you're a literary buff, you might want to read The Castle of Otranto [via amazon.com] - but do be warned that it's quite a difficult text for modern audiences.
Gothic novels featured elements of mystery; of romance; of ghosts; of monsters (Frankenstein started life as a gothic novel!)
People envisaged castles to be filled with secret passages, terrible old mysteries, and even to be filled with vampires and fearful creatures (see more on Hunyad castle, just below!)
Credit: Joel Kabahit CC-BY-2.0Hunyad Castle - A Fearful Gothic Castle, Hidden In Transylvania Hunyad Castle (variously known as Corvinesti Castle or Corvin Castle, after the family who used to own it) is undoubtedly the spookiest of all gothic castles.
Terribly, the legend goes, they it captors turned on their word.
In common with the gothic castles featured in film and novels, Hunyad is famed for its ghosts.
A Wonder of Medieval Gothic Architecture: Malbork Castle in Poland Malbork Castle, in Poland, is undoubtedly the most impressive of all gothic castles.
Malbork Castle, in all its red-brick splendour.
Malbork is a wonder of the Medieval world which has miraculously survived until today.
The perfect vaulted arches within Malbork Castle are a beautiful example of gothic castles architecture.
The legacy of the Gothic lives on to today.
