Point WTC7-7: Foreknowledge of the Collapse of World Trade Center Building 7 IntroductionOn September 11, 2001, many people knew well before World Trade Center 7 collapsed that this 47-story high-rise building was going to come down.
Account 1, the earlier explanation, was widely disseminated on the Internet and at one time received some support from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), thus making it a de facto official account.
[2]Account 2 is the current official account of the collapse, having been put forth in NIST’s final (2008) report.
This was the first time in history that a steel-framed high-rise had collapsed due to fire.
On the issue of certainty, MSNBC reporter Ashleigh Banfield said early in the afternoon: “I’ve heard several reports from several different officers now that that is the building that is going to go down next,” with one of them saying “they’re just waiting for that to come down at this point.”
[12] And indeed, many members of the Fire Department of New York are on record as having been confidently waiting for the building to come down.
We were there for quite a while, a couple hours.”
[14]Firefighter James Wallace said: “They were saying building seven was going to collapse, so we regrouped and went back to our rig.
That was another problem, to wait for building seven to come down.”
[18]The evidence that many witnesses were certain of collapse, which is solid, [19] cannot be explained either by Account 1 or by Account 2.
The existence of early knowledge is also well supported:Firefighter Vincent Massa, speaking of the firefighters waiting for WTC 7 to come down, has said: “The whole time while we were waiting — there were hours that went by.”
[20]Massa’s estimate is confirmed by a wider study of the FDNY oral histories.
The study found that of 60 firefighters who mention predictions about the collapse of WTC 7, the times of these predictions can be determined in 33 cases: in 17 cases the predictions occurred within the two hours before collapse, while in the other 16 cases the predictions were made over two hours before collapse.
The official accounts are also contradicted by premature announcements of the collapse of WTC 7 by CNN and the BBC:CNN announced the impending collapse of WTC 7 an hour and 10 minutes before it actually collapsed.
[24] Directly after its premature announcement, and intermittently for the following hour, CNN displayed the caption, “Building 7 at World Trade Center on fire, may collapse.”
Then 4.5 minutes prior to the collapse, a new caption appeared: “Building #7 ablaze, poised to collapse.”
Finally, 3 minutes later there was another caption: “Building 7 at World Trade Center on fire, on verge of collapse.”
At no time during these 70 minutes could viewers see evidence of any alteration in WTC 7, such as increased fire, partial collapse, or even leaning.
ConclusionNeither Account 1 nor Account 2 of the collapse of WTC 7 can account for the certainty of many people on the scene that the building was going to collapse, the fact that some of them had this foreknowledge long in advance, and that two of the TV networks were able to announce the collapse prematurely.
[6]“Other than initiating the fires in WTC 7, the damage from the debris from WTC 1 had little effect on initiating the collapse of WTC 7.”
Gann, Final Report on the Collapse of World Trade Center Building 7 NIST NCSTAR 1A, p. xxxvii.
“I remember later on in the day as we were waiting for seven to come down, they kept backing us up Vesey, almost like a full block …”“The whole time while we were waiting — there were hours that went by.”
Vincent Massa, p. 17, 19.
[19]MacQueen, “Waiting for Seven: WTC 7 Collapse Warnings in the FDNY Oral Histories.”
[20]World Trade Center Task Force Interview – Vincent Nassa (Interview Date: December 4, 2001), p.19[21]MacQueen, “Waiting for Seven: WTC 7 Collapse Warnings in the FDNY Oral Histories.”
[22]David Griffin, The Mysterious Collapse of World Trade Center 7: Why the Final Official Report About 9/11 Is Unscientific and False, Northampton, Mass.
