RoyalHill19871176 and the fall of the Byzantine Empire Was Manuel Komnenos to blame for the fall of the Byzantine Empire?
In fact, I'm going to go further than that.
I'm going to argue the entire Komnenian restoration of the Byzantine Empire was a failure - and that the Komnenian system was deeply flawed.
During the Roman period, Ephesus became the largest city in Asia Minor, with estimates up to 500,000 population by 100AD.
The fact that the Turks could attack a crusader army at the very gates of Ephesus, at a time when the region was supposedly some 272 miles from the frontier at Philomelion near Iconium, shows how far the Byzantine Empire's fortunes had actually fallen.
If the Byzantines couldn't even keep the Turks from Ephesus, how much control did they actually have over any of their territory?
Manuel wasted huge amounts of resources on a failed invasion of Italy, when his heartland territory in Asia Minor was threatened by the Turks.
He even sent a fleet and army to conquer Egypt, which also failed.
Anyone who has ever played Medieval II Total War will be able to testify, that sending a huge fleet to attack Egypt when the Turks are at large in central Anatolia is an insane move.
On the 1176 campaign, Manuel built a fortress at Dorylaeum, which is right in the northwest of Asia Minor, an area that should have been under firm Byzantine control.
Without Asia Minor, Byzantium was a shadow of itself.
Modern Turkey: population 80 million.
But I suspect that the ratio wouldn't have been so different then.
Yet the fact is that his campaigns didn't actually add much territory in Asia Minor to the empire.
Essentially he contributed the southern coast of Asia Minor, defeated a breakaway state attempt in the northeast, and took some peripheral towns in the north which were often lost again as soon as they had been gained (Gangra, for example).
John's campaigns in Syria in the 1130s and 1140s were every bit as idiotic as Manuel's later adventures in Egypt.
It was a pure waste of time and money for the empire, when the resources could have been put to far better use in the interior of Anatolia.
The fact is he failed to retake Anatolia during the time of the First Crusade.
More than this, during the first ten to fifteen years of his reign (1080 - c1095) many Byzantine towns in Asia Minor were actually still held, but lost to the Turks.
Azarius BaliosI don't know if Manuelos Komnenos had anything to do with the fall of the Eastern empire, but I do know that the Komnenian dysnaty wanted to get rid of the seljuk Turks out off Anatolian country, and don't forget his roman army no longer have the tagmata since they were obliterated in manzikert (by no thanks to those Frankish and Normans mercenaries that avoided the battle) and like the legions entering in the teutoberg forest in germania, that what was missing, second he had those crusaders who mainly wanted Jerusalem instead of forcing the Turks.
So I doubt he had anything to do with the fall of the empire, capital and successor state.
But you can blame it on crusaders part that weakened them and the roman catholic church, for not helping them instead they wanted to take over them.
I certainly don't agree with everything in it, but it's nice to see that Manuel remains a contested figure.
While I certainly would not deny that the Komnenian emperors failed to drive the Turks out of Anatolia, I remain skeptical that this was generally their foreign policy.
The themata that had made up the "heartland" of the empire still had gained most of the manpower from those coastal regions, but we can hardly fault the Komnenoi for not using them since they had been defunct for a century before Alexios took the throne, and dysfunctional for decades before that.
While I also agree that Anna Komnene has to be read very carefully, Alexios had to priortize the Balkans.
If Myriokephalon had been a crushing defeat of Byzantine arms, I'm skeptical that he could have made such a rapid come back.
Certainly it was crucial in the 7th century but the 12th was a different time: I believe by then the Western provinces were the more productive economically, and as far as Asia Minor went the Byzantines still held on to the fertile, populated coastal regions as Kirialax mentioned.
RoyalHill1987Quote:Originally Posted by Kirialax View Post While I certainly would not deny that the Komnenian emperors failed to drive the Turks out of Anatolia, I remain skeptical that this was generally their foreign policy.
That's a good point - and I agree.
They should have concentrated all their efforts to drive the Turks out, but they clearly didn't.
You don't build a great empire by showing up at the frontier once every ten years or so, marching your troops for a few days, and then retreating home again without achieving anything.
Yet he felt comfortable to invade Syria with a vast imperial army of 30-40,000 men, when the territory was much further away and didn't add anything of value to the empire.
The city had also fallen during the First Crusade.
In the Komnenian period, the entire of Byzantine Asia Minor was a frontier zone.
Otherwise, as the map shows, the Komnenian empire had a hugely long frontier, vulnerable at every point, which couldn't be effectively defended.
But the system they created was not a good one in the long term.
It was a system that worked reasonably well to stop the empire from collapsing, as long as there was a competent emperor.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
Imagine that the Komnenoi had concentrated on Asia Minor instead of Europe, or that they had introduced reforms such as a return to the theme system, and history might have worked out differently.
SlaytanincPardon me, as I'm not as informed about this era as I am about earlier eras, and I vastly overrate my knowledge in general, but this seems like a brilliant analysis, but it seems to me that it all relies on a point that I think is flawed.
Furthermore, in this period I agree with auhcxam that the Balkans were more economically valuable than Anatolia was in this period.
Anatolia probably didn't eclipse the Balkans until sometime in the 19th century, as even the Ottomans themselves had their powerbase in the Balkans.
But the system they created was not a good one in the long term.
It was a system that worked reasonably well to stop the empire from collapsing, as long as there was a competent emperor.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
Imagine that the Komnenoi had concentrated on Asia Minor instead of Europe, or that they had introduced reforms such as a return to the theme system, and history might have worked out differently.
That's a good point - and I agree.
They should have concentrated all their efforts to drive the Turks out, but they clearly didn't.
You don't build a great empire by showing up at the frontier once every ten years or so, marching your troops for a few days, and then retreating home again without achieving anything.
I read Birkenmeier's book a few years back.
The fundamental difference is that Byzantium was not Alexander's empire, and never tried to be.
It's a strange conception of either ancient or medieval imperium, and that's what keeps me coming back to it book after book, and degree and degree...
Azarius Balios Quote:Originally Posted by Kirialax View PostI read Birkenmeier's book a few years back.
The fundamental difference is that Byzantium was not Alexander's empire, and never tried to be.
There were once a topic years past, that I eavesdropped that they're were two (or three) types of empires but don't know if you too have heard of it: 1, they are empires that conquer.
Since we don't or I don't know if democracy had a role in the imperial monarchy at work and is the possible reasons of it.
And its probably why it went on the defensive.
