RoyalHill19871176 and the fall of the Byzantine Empire Was Manuel Komnenos to blame for the fall of the Byzantine Empire?
I'm going to argue the entire Komnenian restoration of the Byzantine Empire was a failure - and that the Komnenian system was deeply flawed.
During the Roman period, Ephesus became the largest city in Asia Minor, with estimates up to 500,000 population by 100AD.
The fact that the Turks could attack a crusader army at the very gates of Ephesus, at a time when the region was supposedly some 272 miles from the frontier at Philomelion near Iconium, shows how far the Byzantine Empire's fortunes had actually fallen.
If the Byzantines couldn't even keep the Turks from Ephesus, how much control did they actually have over any of their territory?
Manuel wasted huge amounts of resources on a failed invasion of Italy, when his heartland territory in Asia Minor was threatened by the Turks.
Anyone who has ever played Medieval II Total War will be able to testify, that sending a huge fleet to attack Egypt when the Turks are at large in central Anatolia is an insane move.
Yet the fact is that his campaigns didn't actually add much territory in Asia Minor to the empire.
Essentially he contributed the southern coast of Asia Minor, defeated a breakaway state attempt in the northeast, and took some peripheral towns in the north which were often lost again as soon as they had been gained (Gangra, for example).
The fact is he failed to retake Anatolia during the time of the First Crusade.
More than this, during the first ten to fifteen years of his reign (1080 - c1095) many Byzantine towns in Asia Minor were actually still held, but lost to the Turks.
Azarius BaliosI don't know if Manuelos Komnenos had anything to do with the fall of the Eastern empire, but I do know that the Komnenian dysnaty wanted to get rid of the seljuk Turks out off Anatolian country, and don't forget his roman army no longer have the tagmata since they were obliterated in manzikert (by no thanks to those Frankish and Normans mercenaries that avoided the battle) and like the legions entering in the teutoberg forest in germania, that what was missing, second he had those crusaders who mainly wanted Jerusalem instead of forcing the Turks.
So I doubt he had anything to do with the fall of the empire, capital and successor state.
I certainly don't agree with everything in it, but it's nice to see that Manuel remains a contested figure.
Certainly it was crucial in the 7th century but the 12th was a different time: I believe by then the Western provinces were the more productive economically, and as far as Asia Minor went the Byzantines still held on to the fertile, populated coastal regions as Kirialax mentioned.
That's a good point - and I agree.
They should have concentrated all their efforts to drive the Turks out, but they clearly didn't.
The city had also fallen during the First Crusade.
Otherwise, as the map shows, the Komnenian empire had a hugely long frontier, vulnerable at every point, which couldn't be effectively defended.
But the system they created was not a good one in the long term.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
SlaytanincPardon me, as I'm not as informed about this era as I am about earlier eras, and I vastly overrate my knowledge in general, but this seems like a brilliant analysis, but it seems to me that it all relies on a point that I think is flawed.
But the system they created was not a good one in the long term.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
That's a good point - and I agree.
They should have concentrated all their efforts to drive the Turks out, but they clearly didn't.
Since we don't or I don't know if democracy had a role in the imperial monarchy at work and is the possible reasons of it.
And its probably why it went on the defensive.
