The Fall of the Roman Empire Constantine the Great, 306-337 C.E., divided the Roman Empire in two and made Christianity the dominant religion in the region.
The Visigoths looted, burned, and pillaged their way through the city, leaving a wake of destruction wherever they went.
For the first time in nearly a millennium, the city of Rome was in the hands of someone other than the Romans.
This was the first time that the city of Rome was sacked, but by no means the last.
Constantine and the Rise of Christianity One of the many factors that contributed to the fall of the Roman Empire was the rise of a new religion, Christianity.
The Christian religion, which was monotheistic ran counter to the traditional Roman religion, which was polytheistic (many gods).
In 313 C.E., Roman emperor Constantine the Great ended all persecution and declared toleration for Christianity.
Later that century, Christianity became the official state religion of the Empire.
Finally, by this time, Romans considered their emperor a god.
In 330 C.E., he split the empire into two parts: the western half centered in Rome and the eastern half centered in Constantinople, a city he named after himself.
This map of the Roman Empire in 476 C.E. shows the various people who invaded and how they carved up the Empire.
In 324, Constantine's army defeated the forces of Licinius, the emperor of the east.
Constantine became emperor of the entire empire and founded a new capital city in the eastern half at Byzantium.
The city was his New Rome and was later named Constantinople (the "city of Constantine").
as the western Empire collapsed.
In fact, after the western part of the Roman Empire fell, the eastern half continued to exist as the Byzantine Empire for hundreds of years.
Therefore, the "fall of Rome" really refers only to the fall of the western half of the Empire.
The western half of the empire had a large trade deficit with the eastern half.
This led to inflation.
Finally, piracy and attacks from Germanic tribes disrupted the flow of trade, especially in the west.
Army generals dominated the emperorship, and corruption was rampant.
Over time, the military was transformed into a mercenary army with no real loyalty to Rome.
By the end, these armies were defending Rome against their fellow Germanic tribesmen.
In 476 C.E. Romulus, the last of the Roman emperors in the west, was overthrown by the Germanic leader Odoacer, who became the first Barbarian to rule in Rome.
The order that the Roman Empire had brought to western Europe for 1000 years was no more.
