California Gold Country Visitor Information Running from Downieville in the north to the Millertown Lake in the South, the Gold Country’s slice of California is nestled between the Central Valley and the High Sierra.
Famous for mineral deposits and gold mines, and home to Coloma, the site where gold was first discovered in California, this region still attracts prospectors.
Empire Mine in Grass Valley is the site of the oldest, largest, and richest gold mine in California.
From 1850 to its closing in 1956, it produced 5.8 million ounces of gold.
Reminders of this abundantly rich history can be found everywhere along Hwy 49 as it winds and meanders through the Mother Lode mining towns of days gone by.
Mountain bike and hiking trails are everywhere along the American River.
Stop in to the local ranger station along Hwy.
Popular destinations include: Folsom Lake, home to one of the largest inland marinas; Nevada City, listed on the National Register of Historic Places and considered to be among the best-preserved towns of the West; Main Street in Historic Jamestown, a step back in time with a mixture of buildings from different eras; and Mammoth Bar OHV Area which offers a wide range of trails and conditions in a beautiful setting next to the Middle Fork of the American River.
Some of California's earliest inhabitants left artifacts dating from 500 to 3000 years ago.
Indian Grinding Rock State Historic Park (IGR) preserves a great outcropping of marbleized limestone with some 1,185 mortar holes -- the largest collection of bedrock mortars in North America.
By far the area’s richest history involves the California Gold Rush (1848–1855) when gold was found by James W. Marshall at Sutter's Mill in Coloma, California.
News of the find traveled fast and the first to hear were the people in Oregon, the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), and Latin America, and they were the first to start flocking to the state in late 1848.
All in all, the news of gold brought some 300,000 people to California from the rest of the United States and abroad.
While most of the newly arrived were Americans, the Gold Rush attracted tens of thousands from Latin America, Europe, Australia, and China.
The effects of the Gold Rush were substantial.
Small settlements grew into boomtowns, new towns, roads, schools and churches were built.
A state constitution was written and California became a state in 1850.
The Gold Rush also had negative effects: Native Americans were attacked and pushed off their lands and the mining has caused environmental harm.
Today, many of the museums of this region feature exhibits on the Gold Rush and history of gold mining as well as the Native American History.
Gently rolling hills are studded with oak in the southern portions of the region.
Traveling north and east brings pine trees and high hills with deep canyons.
Multitudes of rivers carve their path through the Gold Country, including the North Fork of the American River, host to the Foresthill Bridge, 3rd tallest bridge in the U.S. and the tallest in California.
Some of the lakes and reservoirs in the region are Rollins, Folsom Comanche, New Hogan, New Melones, Don Pedro, and Millertown.
Winters are cool and wet averaging around 30 inches of rainfall and occasional snowfall depending on how far up in the foothills you go.
Winter temperatures range from the upper twenties to mid fifties.
Auburn and areas north are known for being “above the fog” of the Central Valley and boast clear and sunny days.
