Born 1 October 1904 Vienna, Austria-HungaryDied 22 September 1979 (aged 74)Cambridge, United Kingdom Nationality Austrian/BritishFields physicsKnown for atomic bomb Influences Rudolf Peierls Notable awards Fellow of the Royal Society[1]SignatureUniversity of Birmingham - Poynting Physics Building - blue plaque Otto Robert Frisch FRS[1] (1 October 1904 – 22 September 1979) was an Austrian-British physicist.
He himself was talented at both but also shared his aunt Lise Meitner's love of physics and commenced a period of study at the University of Vienna, graduating in 1926 with some work on the effect of the newly discovered electron on salts.
He followed this with a five-year stint in Copenhagen with Niels Bohr where he increasingly specialised in nuclear physics, particularly in neutron physics.
While there she received the news that Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in Berlin had discovered that the collision of a neutron with a uranium nucleus produced the element barium as one of its byproducts.
Hahn, in a letter to Meitner, called this new reaction a "bursting" of the uranium nucleus.
With war on his mind, he and the physicist Rudolf Peierls produced the Frisch–Peierls memorandum at Birmingham University, which was the first document to set out a process by which an atomic explosion could be generated.
In 1944 at Los Alamos, one of Frisch's tasks as the leader of the Critical Assemblies group was to accurately determine the exact amount of enriched uranium which would be required to create the critical mass, the mass of uranium which would sustain a nuclear chain reaction.
In 1946 he returned to England to take up the post of head of the nuclear physics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, though he also spent much of the next thirty years teaching at Cambridge where he was Jacksonian Professor of Natural Philosophy and a fellow of Trinity College.
Frisch is identified as being at the Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Copenhagen.
Frisch, O. R. (1939).
[The experiment for this letter to the editor was conducted on 13 January 1939; see Rhodes, Richard (1986).
263 and 268.
Otto R. Frisch, "The Discovery of Fission – How It All Began", Physics Today, V20, N11, pp.
