The Brazilian 'Earthquake' & The Empire Of Chaos Submitted by Tyler Durden on 03/10/2016 22:00 -0400Authored by Pepe Escobar, originally posted at Sputnik News.com,Imagine one of the most admired global political leaders in modern history taken from his apartment at 6 am by armed Brazilian Federal Police agents and forced into an unmarked car to the Sao Paulo airport to be interrogated for almost four hours in connection with a billion dollar corruption scandal involving the giant state oil company Petrobras.
This is the stuff Hollywood is made of.
And that was exactly the logic behind the elaborate production.
The public prosecutors of the two-year-old Car Wash investigation maintain there are "elements of proof" implicating Lula in receiving funds — at least 1.1 million euros — from the dodgy kickback scheme involving major Brazilian construction companies connected to Petrobras.
Lula is the ultimate political animal — on a Bill Clinton level.
He had already telegraphed he was waiting for such a gambit, as the Car Wash machine had already arrested dozens of people suspected of embezzling contracts between their companies and Petrobras — to the tune of over $2 billion — to pay for politicians of the Workers' Party (PT), of which Lula was leader.
The working hypothesis — there is no smoking gun — is that Lula, when he led Brazil between 2003 and 2010, personally benefited from the corruption scheme with Petrobras at the center, obtaining favors for himself, the PT and the government.
Meanwhile, inefficient President Dilma Rousseff is herself under attack engineered via a plea bargain by the former government leader in the Senate.
The Hollywood blitz was cleared by federal judge Sergio Moro — who always insists he's been inspired by the Italian judge Antonio di Pietro and the notorious 1990s Mani Pulite ("Clean Hands") investigation.
And here, inevitably, the plot thickens.
Round up the usual media suspects Moro and the Car Wash prosecutors justified the Hollywood blitz insisting Lula refused to be interrogated.
And yet Car Wash investigators had consistently leaked to mainstream media words to the effect, "We can't just bite Lula.
When we get to him, we will swallow him. "
And would also imply that the Hollywood blitz may have been supported by a smoking gun.
Yet it gets curioser and curioser when we learn that judge Moro wrote an article in an obscure magazine way back in 2004 (in Portuguese only, titled Considerations about Mani Pulite, CEJ magazine, issue number 26, July/September 2004), where he clearly extols "authoritarian subversion of juridical order to reach specific targets " and using the media to intoxicate the political atmosphere.
All of this serving a very specific agenda, of course.
In Brazil, the target is the left — while the right, at least for the moment, seems to be composed of hymn-singing angels.
What Car Wash has already forcefully imprinted across Brazil is the perception that corruption only pays when the accused is a progressive nationalist.
As for Washington consensus vassals, they are always angels — mercifully immune from prosecution.
That's happening because Moro and his team are masterfully playing to the hilt Moro's self-described use of the media to intoxicate the political atmosphere — with public opinion serially manipulated even before someone is formally charged with any crime.
Because there are no smoking guns, something even Moro admits.
And that leads us towards the nasty scenario of a made in Brazil media-judicial-police complex possibly hijacking one of the healthiest democracies in the world.
And that is supported by a stark fact: the right-wing Brazilian opposition's entire "project" boils down to ruining the economy of the 7th largest global economic power to justify the destruction of Lula as a presidential candidate in 2018.
Elite Plundering Rules None of the above can be understood by a global audience without some acquaintance with classic Braziliana.
Indeed; this is an astonishingly complex society — which essentially descended from a Garden of Eden (before the Portuguese "discovered" it in 1500) to slavery (which still permeates all social relations) to a crucial event in 1808: the arrival of Dom John VI of Portugal (and Emperor of Brazil for life), fleeing Napoleon's invasion, and carrying with him 20,000 people who masterminded the "modern" Brazilian state.
And few have ever been held accountable.
Traditional Brazilian elites compose one of the most noxious arrogant-ignorant-prejudiced mixes on the planet.
"Justice" — and police enforcement — are only used as a weapon when the polls do not favor their agenda.
Brazilian mainstream media owners are an intrinsic part of these elites.
Much like the US concentration model, only four families control the media landscape, foremost among them the Marinho family's Globo media empire.
I have experienced, from the inside, in detail, how they operate.
Brazil is corrupt to the core — from the comprador elites down to a great deal of the crass "new" elites, which include the PT.
The greed and incompetence displayed by an array of PT stalwarts is appalling — a reflection of the lack of quality cadres.
If this was a no-holds-barred crusade against corruption — which the Car Wash prosecutors insist it is — the right-wing opposition/vassals of the old elites should have been equally exposed in mainstream media.
But then the elite-controlled media would simply ignore the prosecutors.
And there would be nothing remotely on the scale of the Hollywood blitz, with Lula — pictured as a lowly delinquent — humiliated in front of the whole planet.
Car Wash prosecutors are right; perception is reality.
No consumption, no investment, no credit Brazil couldn't be in a gloomier situation.
GDP was down 3.8% last year; probably will be down 3.5% this year.
The industrial sector was down 6.2% last year, and the mining sector down 6.6% in the last quarter.
The nation is on the way to its worst recession since…1901.
The Central Bank still keeps its benchmark interest rate at a whopping 14.25%.
Today Rousseff "governs" — that's a figure of speech — for the banking cartel and the rentiers of Brazilian public debt.
Over $120 billion of the government's budget evaporates to pay interest on the public debt.
Inflation is up — now in double-digit territory.
Unemployment is at 7.6% — still not bad as many a player across the EU — but rising.
The usual suspects of course are gloating, spinning non-stop how Brazil has become "toxic" for global investors.
Yes, it's bleak.
There's no consumption.
No investment.
No credit.
The only way out would be to unlock the political crisis.
Shades of good ol' regime change; for these Wall Street/Empire of Chaos vassals, an economic crisis, fueled by a political crisis, must by all means bring down the elected government of a key BRICS player.
The move against him by the Car Wash investigation may yet backfire — badly.
Never underestimate a political animal of his stature.
Brazil is not on the ropes.
If reelected, and assuming he could purge the PT from a legion of crooks, Lula could push for a new dynamic.
Before the crisis, Brazilian capital was going global — via Petrobras, Embraer, the BNDES (the bank model that inspired the BRICS bank), the construction companies.
Judge Moro himself has theorized that corruption festers because the Brazilian economy is too closed to the outside world, as India's was until recently.
A top priority of the Empire of Chaos is to prevent the emergence of regional powers fueled by abundant natural resources, from oil to strategic minerals.
Brazil amply fits the bill.
Washington of course feels entitled to "defend" these resources.
Thus the need to quash not only regional integration associations such as Mercosur and Unasur but most of all the global reach of the BRICS.
Petrobras used to be a very efficient state company that then doubled as the single operator of the largest oil reserves discovered in the 21st century so far; the pre-salt deposits.
No company on the planet would hand this over to the competition.
And yet a notorious right-wing opposition maggot promised Chevron in 2014 to hand over the exploitation of pre-salt mostly to Big Oil.
And Rousseff is meekly going for it.
Couple it to the fact that Rousseff's government did absolutely nothing to buy back Petrobras stock — whose vertiginous fall was deftly engineered by the usual suspects.
The meticulous dismantling of Petrobras, Big Oil eventually profiting from the pre-salt deposits, keeping in check Brazil's global power projection, all this plays beautifully to the interests of the Empire of Chaos.
Geopolitically, this goes way beyond the Hollywood blitz and the Car Wash investigation.
It's unlikely Lula, by himself, will be able to stop them.
