Tower House Castles of Medieval Europe Tower of Hallbar, South Lanarkshire, Scotland.
The tower house is one type of castle built during the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The occupants of these buildings called them castles and they are considered a variety of castle within the genre.
Of the surviving medieval tower houses, a couple of them have wall paintings, an extraordinarily exceptional feature that make them special.
Tower Houses in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland The motte and bailey castle was introduced in England after the Norman Conquest.
William began a royal program of castle building for defensive purposes and to house garrisons and supplies.
These were later replaced by castles made of stone with square tower keeps.
Along with the king, greater barons built castles too.
They served three purposes.
In particular, barons were encouraged to build castles creating a deliberate defensive scheme along the borders of Scotland and Wales.
Consequently, more mercenary soldiers were used.
They began to build semi-fortified manor houses with square tower keeps, crenellations and a gatehouse.
A tower house as one’s home was a symbol of status, power and rank, denoting the owner could look after himself and protect his valuable possessions.
Tower houses began to be built in cities, along the coast and in the Marches and Borders.
Stokesay Castle in Shropshire While appearing to be similar to the tower-keeps of castles dating from the twelfth century, it differed in several ways.
There was no forebuilding, it was entered from ground level, and it was more lightly built and for the most part not attached to a larger fortified area.
It was designed to create security and make entry as difficult as possible.
Tower houses were notably plain, commonly rectangular and three stories, with some having four stories.
The ground floor was typically used for storage and sometimes had a separate entrance.
The first floor was usually a hall with a fireplace and private chambers would be on the upper floors.
There would sometimes be a fireplace on the upper levels too with the chimneys enclosed within the wall.
A winding staircase would be built into the thickness of the wall or would be in a projecting corner tower.
There is scarce evidence for a kitchen or other rooms for storage and preparation of food.
There were many differences in the architecture of these towers with regional variations of design between Scotland, the Borders and the rest of England.
In England the towers were generally annexed to a hall.
A northern tower was usually a stand-alone edifice while a southern tower would be connected to the hall.
The urban tower house was a rarity in England.
We know of Baynard’s Castle in London which lasted into the thirteenth century when the site was given to the Dominicans.
King Richard II is known to have built a tower at the corner of his private palace at Westminster.
There is evidence of other urban towers in Lincoln and Winchester.
These towers gave short-term protection against a small force who purpose was to seize booty rather than territory.
Tower houses were a far more numerous and common feature in northern England and the borders where security was an issue.
Some noted examples of tower houses that can still be seen in England include: Sizergh in Cumbria, Arnside Tower in Cumbria, Piel Tower House on the Furness Peninsula, Halloughton in Nottingham, Stokesay Castle in Shropshire, Lympne Castle in Kent, Godlingston Manor in Dorset, Pengersick Castle in Cornwall and Kyme in Lincolnshire just to name a few.
The best surviving tower house of lowland England is Longthorpe Tower in Peterborough, one of the tower houses with an exceptional feature.
Longthorpe is a three story tower that was added to an older house and built between 1290 and 1300 by the Thorpe family, who went from peasants to knights in just three generations.
By 1260 they were knights and had the resources to build a manor at Longthorpe along with a chapel.
Around 1300, the tower was added to the manor as a status symbol.
Photo from geography.org.uk by Julian Dowse The most notable feature of Longthorpe Tower are the remarkable and rare wall paintings on the first floor that date from 1330-1350.
It was up to local families such as the Percys, the Nevilles and the Dacres to justify their jurisdictional powers and they built many tower houses for protection against raiders.
They were larger and had a higher degree of elaboration.
Also some of the houses had, at the corners, corbelled bartizans which were favored by the French.
One of the finest examples of a medieval Scottish tower house is Craigmillar Castle in Edinburgh, built by the wealth Preston family.
Ruins of Craigmillar Castle (Photo by the author)Tower houses exist but are notably rare in Wales and the March.
They were built by the Anglo-Irish as well as Gaelic families during the years 1400 to 1650.
Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Ireland The majority of the castles in Ireland are tower houses.
The idea for them could also have been imported from England, Scotland or the Continent.
Thoor Ballylee Tower House in Co. Galway, Ireland.
The majority of these buildings were rectangular, nearly square and had tall walls.
One would enter the lobby of the tower and on one side there might be a small porter’s station and on the other a spiral staircase to the upper levels.
Some Irish tower houses had a straight flight of stone steps within the thickness of a side wall instead of a spiral.
The spiral staircase would end at the parapet which consisted of a wall-walk with some crenelation.
Some examples of tower houses in Ireland that still exist are Kinlough Castle in Co. Galway, Dunguire Castle in Co. Galway, Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Bourchiers’ Castle in Co. Tower Houses in France, Italy and Central Europe Tower houses were exceedingly popular across other parts of Europe as well, especially in northern and central Italy where by the end of the twelfth century, feuds between ruling families often turned deadly.
In the Tuscan town of San Gimignano, known as the “City of Beautiful Towers”, the ruling families built seventy two towers.
Today, fourteen of them survive, the tallest being “Torre Grossa” which is 54 meters (177 feet) high and dates from 1298.
In fact, when erecting their towers, the British and Scottish nobles drew some inspiration from the French towers as mentioned above.
There are a few surviving examples of tower houses in Central Europe but one of the best preserved is the ducal tower at Siedlecin in Lower Silesia, Poland.
It dates from 1315/1316 and is representative of a medieval seat built for both residential and defensive purposes near the River Bóbr crossing by Duke Henryk I of Jawor (1292-96/1346).
Ducal tower at Siedlecin, the Lower Silesia, Poland.
The most siginificant alteration since the fourteenth century is the addition of a roof in the sixteenth century.
Adjacent to the tower is a manor house which also dates from this period.
Ducal Tower of Siedlecin (Photo courtesy of rimlightstudio, the tower’s finest interior space is that of the former Great Hall on the second floor.
Today the ducal tower of Siedlecin is the only place in the world where Lancelot paintings have been preserved in situ.
Ducal Tower of Siedlecin Official Website So these wonderful tower houses are a testament to life during medieval times.
They combine political and social as well as artistic history all in one.
Further reading: “The Medieval Castle in England and Wales: A social and political history: by N.J.G.
