Concentric Castles and Crusader CastlesA concentric castle is a castle with two or more concentric curtain walls, where the outer wall is lower than the inner and can be defended from it.
The layout was rectangular where the terrain permitted (Belvoir, Beaumaris), or an irregular polygon where curtain walls of a spur castle followed the contours of a hill (Krak, Margat).
The relationship of the concentric castle to other forms of fortification is complex.
In German-speaking countries, many castles had double curtain walls with a narrow ward between them, called a Zwinger (English lists, French lices).
These double walls were usually added at vulnerable points like the gate, but rarely as fully developed as the in concentric castles.
The earliest example of a concentric castle is the crusader castle of Belvoir (c 1168), whose regular rectangular layout has been described as one castrum nested inside another.
Some historians have plausibly argued that the concentric defence arose as a response to advances in siege technology in the crusader states from the 12th to the 13th centuries.
In a concentric castle the outer wall protected the inner one from siege engines, while the inner wall and the projecting towers provided flanking fire from crossbows.
In addition, the strong towers served as platforms for trebuchets for shooting back at the besiegers.
While a concentric castle has double walls and towers on all sides, the defences are not necessarily uniform in all directions.
Concentric castles were expensive to build, so that only the powerful military orders, the Hospitallers and Templars, or kings such as Edward I, could afford to build and maintain them.
Such castles were beyond the means of feudal barons.
As Beaumaris was built on flat terrain, it was necessary to build walls and towers facing in all directions, giving a very regular, almost square, floor plan to the castle.
The principle of an outer and inner wall was also used in fortified cities, such as the Theodosian Walls of Constantinople and the city wall of Carcassonne.
