History of Famous Castles Around the World Castle of Neuschwanstein List of Famous Castles Alnwick Castle One of the most famous castles in northern England is without a doubt castle Alnwick.
Here you can read more about it.
It was made to be home for several high class families, who have opened part of the castle to tourists.
Château de Chenonceau France has many famous castles, but one of the best known ones is Château de Chenonceau, beautiful castle who remained in the spotlight of the European history.
Find out more about it here.
Learn more about it here.
Conwy Castle Considered by many historians to be one of the finest crafted medieval castles from 13th and 14th century Europe, castle Conwy even today represents one of the most spectacular castles in the entire world.
Heidelberg Castle Castles created in the Gothic & Renaissance styles were built all across Europe in the 13th and 14th century, but only one of them is today considered as one of the most important places of engineering, fashion and innovations north of the Alps.
With its history that spans more than 800 years, Heidelberg Castle managed to become one of the most famous castle ruins of the Germany that is visited by millions of tourists each year.
Find out more about this influential castle here.
Lichtenstein Castle
The old Lichtenstein Castle went through many changes during its 800 year old life, but one thing it is best known is its latest version that was rebuilt in mid-19th century.
Neuschwanstein Castle Neuschwanstein Castle is one of the most famous castles in the world.
Tower of London London and its surrounding area are home of many castles that were created during the time of Norman Invasion, but the most famous of them all is without the doubt Tower of London.
Here you can find out more about its history, occupants and the way its function changed with centuries.
Warwick Castle
If you want to find out something more about one of the best known castles in England, Warwick Castle, enter in here and learn most interesting points about its origins, wartime history, its owners and its current condition.
Windsor Castle As the home of the English royal family, London’s Windsor castle is one of the most famous castles in the world.
Here you can read detailed info about some of the most popular ones located in England, Germany, France and many other countries.
Castle History Castle history started in Europe and the Middle East during the Middle Ages, and was supported almost completely by nobility and military.
Read here more about evolution of castles.
Castle Facts
If you want to learn more about famous castles, construction, locations, and the way they managed to impact our culture, history, warfare and fashion, this is the perfect place to do so.
Bodiam Castle viewed from the northwest History of Famous Castles Modern history of Europe was defined with both constant warfare and numerous fashion changes that were carried on by royalty and nobility, and during all that time, castles stood as a proud guardians of history.
Proliferation of castle construction started spreading across entire Europe in 9th century, and ever since then advances in technology, stonework, long range weapons and fashion fueled more than 7 centuries of the golden age of castle history.
Durability and usefulness of those early castles was very rudimentary, but because of the lack of powerful siege weapons, even simpler wooden forts managed to provide significant defense against invading military forces.
This situation changed with the rise of Roman Empire, which started utilizing very effective siege engines that even had ability to attack stone hill forts.
However, with increase of wars across entire Europe and the organized expansion of Normans beyond Scandinavia in 11th century, castles started being made from stone.
That period of time was specifically notable for the rise of famous English castles such as Windsor Castle, Tower of London, Warick and Alnwick castles, all which remained standing to today, providing stability and military support during times of war and governmental and historical centers during time of peace.
By late 18th and entire 19th century, Europe became enhanced in the nostalgia about Renaissance and medieval times, which was cause for the creation of very elaborate and fashionable castles that are today regarded as some of the best castles ever made.
