Alien and Sedition Acts Text of the Aliens Act Text of the Sedition Act The Alien and Sedition Acts were four bills passed by the Federalist dominated 5th United States Congress, and signed into law by President John Adams in 1798.
[1] They made it harder for an immigrant to become a citizen (Naturalization Act), allowed the president to imprison and deport non-citizens who were deemed dangerous (Alien Friends Act) or who were from a hostile nation (Alien Enemies Act), and criminalized making false statements that were critical of the federal government (Sedition Act).
[2] Three of the acts were repealed after the Democratic-Republican party of Thomas Jefferson came to power.
In 1948 the Supreme Court determined that presidential powers under the acts continued after cessation of hostilities, until there was a peace treaty with the hostile nation.
[3] The Alien Friends Act allowed the president to imprison or deport aliens considered "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States" at any time, while the Alien Enemies Act authorized the president to do the same to any male citizen of a hostile nation above the age of fourteen during times of war.
[6]HistoryThe opposition to the Federalists, spurred on by Democratic-Republicans, reached new heights at this time with the Democratic-Republicans supporting France still in the midst of the French Revolution.
Opposition to them resulted in the highly controversial Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, authored by James Madison and Thomas Jefferson.
The congressman was the first individual that was placed on trial under the Alien and Sedition Acts.
Historian Ron Chernow says of this "he wasn't calling for peaceful protests or civil disobedience: he was calling for outright rebellion, if needed, against the federal government of which he was vice president. "
The proclamation gave the Attorney General authority regarding aliens enemies within the continental United States, to decide whether they are "dangerous to the public peace and safety of the United States", to order them removed, and to create regulations governing their removal.
21-24), as to powers of the President to makes public proclamation regarding "subjects of the hostile nation" more than fourteen years old, inside the United States but not naturalized, to remove them as alien enemies and determine the means of removal.
Truman gave authority to the Secretary of State to determine if alien enemies in the United States who were sent to the United States from Latin America, or who were in the United States illegally, endangered the welfare or security.
As to alien enemies who had been brought into the continental United States from Latin America after December 1941, the proclamation gave the Secretary of State authority to decide if their presence was "prejudicial to the future security or welfare of the Americas", and to make regulations for their removal.
North Dakota was represented by controversial Senator William "Wild Bill" Langer.
In 2015, presidential candidate Donald Trump made a proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the United States (as part of the war on terror); Roosevelt's application of the Alien Enemies Act was cited as a possible justification.
