Texas Exhibition!
Who was the man for whom this giant statue was built?
Sam Houston was born on March 2, 1793, in Rockbridge County, Tennessee.
Adopted by Chief Oolooteka, he lived with the Cherokee Indians for three years and was known as “the Raven.”
This close relationship would forever affect Houston’s feelings towards Indians.
Houston joined the United States Army when war broke out with the British.
While healing from his wounds, he was appointed a sub-Indian agent and helped Chief Oolooteka’s tribe settle west of the Mississippi.
In late 1818, Sam Houston was elected attorney general of Nashville, but later returned to his private law practice in the early 1820s.
Elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1823, Houston worked unsuccessfully to get Andrew Jackson elected President of the United States.
Sam was re-elected to Congress for a second and third term, followed by a successful bid for the Governorship of Tennessee.
In grief over the breakup of his 11-week marriage, Houston crossed the Mississippi River and headed to Indian Territory.
He left his Cherokee family and entered Mexican Texas.
In early November, Houston was appointed as the major general of the Texas army.
On March 6, 1836, the Alamo fell to the Mexican Army under General Santa Anna.
In the meantime, Sam Houston returned from Washington-on-the-Brazos to his army in Gonzales and they retreated towards the east.
They wanted nothing left in Gonzales to help Santa Anna’s army.
Many were worried about Houston’s retreat, fearing that he was afraid of Santa Anna’s strength and feeling that their men had died at the Alamo in vain.
Santa Anna’s army was defeated in an 18-minute battle, and he was captured the following day.
Sam Houston at the Battle of San Jacinto Painting by Harry Arthur Mc Ardle (1836-1908)Sam Houston became the first elected president of the Republic of Texas, defeating Stephen F. Austin.
According to its constitution, Sam Houston was unable to succeed himself as President of the Republic of Texas, so he ran for and served in the House of Representatives from 1839-1841.
He defeated then-President Mirabeau B. Lamar, and again became President of the Republic of Texas in 1841, serving until 1844.
Houston was defeated the first time he ran for the office of Governor of Texas, but won the election in 1859.
A slave owner himself, Houston opposed secession from the U.S. and was removed from office when he refused to take the oath of loyalty to the new Confederate States of America.
He moved with family to Huntsville, Texas, and died there on July 23, 1863.
