Mexico, the US and War Texas, the Alamo and Independence | Mexico Politics, 1836-44 | Van Buren to Polk and annexation of Texas | the Mexico-US War Begins | War for California and New Mexico | Battles at Monterrey and Buena Vista |
Hostilities in California and New Mexico, 1846-47 | Guerrilla War and the Push to Mexico City | The Gadsden Purchase: Mexico Sell Land to the United States Texas, the Alamo and Independence Mexico's migration policy for Texas was similar to that for California and New Mexico.
A US citizen from Arkansas, Moses Austin, had acquired land in Texas in 1820.
In 1823, Mexico confirmed this land grant and allowed Austin's son, Stephen F. Austin, to sell plots of land to settlers so long as they were of good character.
The land could be bought for 12.5 cents an acre – one tenth the cost of unwanted land in the United States.
The Alamo In 1828, President Andrew Jackson offered to buy Texas, but Mexico refused his offer.
Austin's migrants, meanwhile, were demonstrating that they were an industrious lot.
Most had some education, and the migrants were setting up schools to educate their young.
Mexico's elite had no desire to move to Texas and take up farming.
There were about 1,000 slaves and about 5,000 Mexicans.
Mexico began actively encouraging Mexicans and people from Europe, particularly from Switzerland and Germany, to settle in Texas.
They were concerned about preserving their own culture and their ability to express themselves politically, including a demand that slavery be allowed.
President Bustamante was unpopular, in part because of the execution of Vicente Guerrero in February 1831.
Presidential duties were left to the vice president, and he began a bold move against conservative forces: the army and the Church.
He moved to secularize education and denied the Church its right to collect an involuntary tithe, leaving what people gave the Church a matter of conscience.
The Anglos held a convention in 1833, at San Felipe, 130 miles east of San Antonio, attended by around 56 delegates.
It called for Mexico to repeal the anti-immigration section of its law of April 6, 1830.
Texas had been united with the state of Coahuila back in 1824, and the convention called for Texas to become an independent state within Mexico.
The convention sent Stephen Austin to Mexico City with their request for reform.
On June 1, 1833, Mexico's military, led by General Gabriél Durán, rebelled against Vice President Gómez Farías and kidnapped Santa Anna, declaring the great hero Santa Anna to be dictator.
Austin had arrived in Mexico City in July and was received with hostility.
Santa Anna repealed the constitution of 1824, and in May 1834 he sent Gómez Farías into exile.
In November, the Anglo-Americans defied Santa Anna by voting to defend Mexico's 1824 constitution, and volunteers began arriving from the United States to take part in a war against Santa Anna.
Santa Anna sent his brother-in law, General Cós, with 500 troops to Texas to disarm the settlers and to expel "troublemakers. "
Fighting erupted, and during the fighting in November the Anglo-Americans created a document known as the Organic Law, outlining a provisional government for Texas.
Then in December on the outskirts of San Antonio at a fortress in a place called the Alamo, a horde of armed Anglo farmers defeated Cós, who surrendered.
He led an army toward Texas, and he lost half of his more than 6,000 ill-clad and ill-fed men crossing desert through winter weather.
In February he suddenly appeared in Texas with an army of 3,000.
When Cós had surrendered to the Anglos he had promised to take his men with him out of Texas and fight the Anglos no more, but Cós joined his few hundred men with those of Santa Anna.
The military leader of the Anglos, Sam Houston, was practical and advised fighters to abandon San Antonio, proclaiming that standing there was futile, but a couple of hundred of them refused.
They decided to hold up at the place of victory against Cós – the Alamo.
Most of the Anglos at the Alamo followed the commander there, Colonel William Travis, and stayed to fight.
Santa Anna raised a scarlet flag on the belfry of San Antonio's church, indicating that he would not be granting mercy to any Anglo who surrendered.
Among the Anglos at the Alamo words were spoken about fighting to the death.
The six who surrendered – one of whom was Davy Crocket – were cut down the following day with swords.
Crocket was a celebrity in the United States, and people there wanted to believe that Crockett had gone down fighting to the end.
Santa Anna assumed that he had defeated the Anglos of Texas, and he relaxed.
The Anglos in Texas, meanwhile, on March 2, had issued their Declaration of Independence.
On April 20, Santa Anna, now with a force of around 1,110 men, met a force of 800 men led by Sam Houston, near the San Jacinto River, on the eastern side of what is now the city of Houston.
Some Anglos wanted him killed.
Houston treated Santa Anna as a guest, and he won from Santa Anna a pledge to end the fighting and to withdraw Mexico's army from Texas.
A second pledge by Santa Anna remained secret, an agreement by Santa Anna to prepare Mexico City to receive a peace delegation from Texas for formal recognition of the independence of Texas.
One of Santa Anna's generals obeyed Santa Anna and withdrew Mexican military personnel from Texas.
There, during a dinner, Santa Anna tried unassertively to sell Texas to the United States at a bargain price, but Jackson was not buying.
He saw Texas as already independent of Mexico, and he sent Santa Anna back to Vera Cruz aboard a US warship.
In 1837, the United States officially recognized Texas as independent.
Mexico refused such recognition.
