10 spooky experiences to freak you out in Britain1.
Most famous is the London Dungeon, which is now based on South Bank, close to the London Eye, and is more terrifying than ever before.
Be chased through a maze by Jack the Ripper and take a ride into the depths of the dungeon.
There are similarly ghoulish experiences on offer in York, Edinburgh, Blackpool and at Warwick Castle.
Ghost Walk of Tenby, south-west WalesA
mix of history, myth and humour combine to make this a light-hearted, 90-minute walk around the seaside town of Tenby in south-west Wales.
Local guide Marion Davies tells tales of haunted pubs and ghostly goings-on in the backstreets of town, while the walk also takes in the stunning coastline around Tenby with beautiful sea views.
www.guidedtourswales.co.ukGetting there: Tenby is around two hours’ drive west of Cardiff, while trains from Cardiff take around two-and-a-half hours with a change at Swansea.
Glamis Castle, Angus, Scotland One of the most haunted castles in Scotland, Glamis was the childhood home of the Queen Mother.
According to legend, the castle is cursed because an ancestral chalice was once removed from the house, where it was supposed to stay forever.
The ghost of a servant boy lurks by the Queen’s bedroom, while the grounds are haunted by a mutilated woman and, somewhere in a secret room, the ghost of Earl Crawford gambles with the devil.
Crumlin Road Gaol, Belfast, Northern Ireland The Crumlin Road Gaol only closed its doors as recently as 1996, after 151 years in operation as a prison where it punished people for a range of crimes, from petty theft to political imprisonment.
The gaol was recently fully refurbished as a visitor attraction, and provides a glimpse through prison life from Victorian times to the late 20th century.
Visit the condemned man’s cell, walk the tunnel connecting the gaol to the courthouse and feel the unearthly presence of those dissatisfied with their sentences, or take a dedicated Paranormal Gaol Tour and use equipment used by experts in the field.
www.crumlinroadgaol.comGetting there: Crumlin Road Gaol is in central Belfast.
The trials of the Pendle Witches, which took place in 1612, are the most famous witch trials in English history, where ten people were hung for crimes including murder by witchcraft.
www.pendlewitchexperience.comGetting there: Pendle Hill is around one hour’s drive north of Manchester, but is difficult to reach via public transport.
Whitby Ghost Walk, Whitby, Yorkshire, north England Whitby is famous to all horror-lovers for its links to Count Dracula; the author, Bram Stoker, wrote the book while living in the town.
This evening tour winds through the alleyways and backstreets, with the Man in Black (the tour guide) sharing spine-chilling tales and ghostly stories.
www.whitbywalks.co.ukGetting there: Whitby is around one hour and 20 minutes’ drive east of York, or there are regular bus services from York taking around 90 minutes.
The tour ends at the cemetery of the Gothic Anglican cathedral, a place to chill the bones of even the most committed ghost-buster.
www.shiverpool.co.uk/our-tours/hope-st-shivers.aspxGetting there: Liverpool is around four hours’ drive north of London, while trains from London Euston take two hours.
Ghost Walk York, Yorkshire, north EnglandA ghost tour that’s suitable for families, this 75-minute tour relates some of York’s spookiest tales, including the Headless Earl and the Grey Lady (a nun who was walled up alive).
York has a maze of ancient alleyways and passages and this tour explores them all, encouraging audience participation in the tour and even some surprise re-enactments.
www.ghostwalkyork.co.ukGetting there: York is just under a four-hour drive north of London, while trains from London Kings Cross take just over two hours.
www.falstaffexperience.co.ukGetting there: Stratford-upon-Avon is around two hours’ drive west of London; trains from London Marylebone take two hours.
Each night has a different theme, Mondays are classic ghost stories, Wednesday’s are more ghoulish (avoid if you’re squeamish) and Thursdays mix ghoulish stories with traditional ghostly tales, while walking round the atmospheric Campo Lane area of the city.
www.steelcityghosttours.co.ukGetting there: Sheffield is around three-and-a-half hours north of London, trains from London St Pancras take just over two hours.
For more information contact:VisitBritain Media Teampressandpr@visitbritain.com
