Mexico, the US and War Texas, the Alamo and Independence | Mexico Politics, 1836-44 | Van Buren to Polk and annexation of Texas | the Mexico-US War Begins | War for California and New Mexico | Battles at Monterrey and Buena Vista |
Hostilities in California and New Mexico, 1846-47 | Guerrilla War and the Push to Mexico City | The Gadsden Purchase: Mexico Sell Land to the United States Texas, the Alamo and Independence Mexico's migration policy for Texas was similar to that for California and New Mexico.
In 1823, Mexico confirmed this land grant and allowed Austin's son, Stephen F. Austin, to sell plots of land to settlers so long as they were of good character.
Austin's migrants, meanwhile, were demonstrating that they were an industrious lot.
Most had some education, and the migrants were setting up schools to educate their young.
Mexico's elite had no desire to move to Texas and take up farming.
There were about 1,000 slaves and about 5,000 Mexicans.
Presidential duties were left to the vice president, and he began a bold move against conservative forces: the army and the Church.
He moved to secularize education and denied the Church its right to collect an involuntary tithe, leaving what people gave the Church a matter of conscience.
Texas had been united with the state of Coahuila back in 1824, and the convention called for Texas to become an independent state within Mexico.
The convention sent Stephen Austin to Mexico City with their request for reform.
On June 1, 1833, Mexico's military, led by General Gabriél Durán, rebelled against Vice President Gómez Farías and kidnapped Santa Anna, declaring the great hero Santa Anna to be dictator.
Austin had arrived in Mexico City in July and was received with hostility.
In November, the Anglo-Americans defied Santa Anna by voting to defend Mexico's 1824 constitution, and volunteers began arriving from the United States to take part in a war against Santa Anna.
When Cós had surrendered to the Anglos he had promised to take his men with him out of Texas and fight the Anglos no more, but Cós joined his few hundred men with those of Santa Anna.
The military leader of the Anglos, Sam Houston, was practical and advised fighters to abandon San Antonio, proclaiming that standing there was futile, but a couple of hundred of them refused.
They decided to hold up at the place of victory against Cós – the Alamo.
Most of the Anglos at the Alamo followed the commander there, Colonel William Travis, and stayed to fight.
Santa Anna raised a scarlet flag on the belfry of San Antonio's church, indicating that he would not be granting mercy to any Anglo who surrendered.
Among the Anglos at the Alamo words were spoken about fighting to the death.
Crocket was a celebrity in the United States, and people there wanted to believe that Crockett had gone down fighting to the end.
Santa Anna assumed that he had defeated the Anglos of Texas, and he relaxed.
The Anglos in Texas, meanwhile, on March 2, had issued their Declaration of Independence.
On April 20, Santa Anna, now with a force of around 1,110 men, met a force of 800 men led by Sam Houston, near the San Jacinto River, on the eastern side of what is now the city of Houston.
Houston treated Santa Anna as a guest, and he won from Santa Anna a pledge to end the fighting and to withdraw Mexico's army from Texas.
A second pledge by Santa Anna remained secret, an agreement by Santa Anna to prepare Mexico City to receive a peace delegation from Texas for formal recognition of the independence of Texas.
He saw Texas as already independent of Mexico, and he sent Santa Anna back to Vera Cruz aboard a US warship.
In 1837, the United States officially recognized Texas as independent.
