James Bowie James Bowie April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836 (aged 39)Nickname Jim Bowie Place of birth Logan County, Kentucky (USA)Place of death the Alamo, San Antonio, Republic of Texas Allegiance United States of America Republic of Texas Service/branch Republic of Texas Militia Years of service 1835, 1836 Rank ColonelUnit Garrison of the Alamo Commands held the Alamo, San Antonio Battles/wars siege of the Alamo James "Jim" Bowie (April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836) was a nineteenth century American pioneer and soldier who took a prominent part in the Texas Revolution and was killed at the Battle of the Alamo.
Bowie is also known for the style of knife he carried, which came to be known as the "Bowie knife. "
He was born in Kentucky and spent most of his life in Louisiana.
Bowie worked as a land speculator for several years, but many of his land deals were fraudulent, based on forged titles.
He gained fame in 1827 when he participated in the Sandbar Fight and killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife.
Newspapers printed the story of the fight, and within the next few years Bowie's fame, and that of his knife, spread around the world.
Bowie was often away from home in the early years of his marriage, and spent several months looking for the lost Los Almagres Mine.
In 1800, Rezin Bowie sold his property and the family spent two years in Missouri.
They moved to Spanish Louisiana in 1802 when he was six[1] settling on the Bushley Bayou in Rapides Parish.
They found a permanent home in Opelousas Parish in 1812.
[3] [9] In June 1819, Bowie joined the Long expedition.
[12]Land speculator Shortly before Bowie's father died in 1818 or 1819 he gifted Bowie and his brother Rezin each ten servants, horses, and cattle.
[9] Louisiana was gaining population rapidly, and the brothers wished to take advantage of rising land prices by speculating in land but did not have the capital required to buy large tracts of land.
He would buy smuggled slaves from Lafitte, then bring the slaves directly to a customhouse and inform on himself.
The customs officers would put the slaves up for auction, and Bowie would buy them back.
[15] [16]In 1825, the two brothers joined with their younger brother Stephen to buy Acadia, a plantation near Alexandria.
[9]Bowie and his brother John were involved in a large court case in the late 1820s over their land speculation in Louisiana.
When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803, the country had promised to honor all former land grant claims, and, for the next 20 years, tried to determine who owned what land.
Wright's friends intervened and stopped the attack, and Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife on his person from then on.
[23] Other members of the groups, who had various reasons for disliking each other, began fighting.
Bowie was shot in the hip; after regaining his feet he drew a large knife, described as a butcher knife, and charged his attacker.
Wright shot at, and missed, the prone Bowie, who returned fire and possibly hit Wright.
[24] Wright died instantly, and Bowie, with Wright's sword still protruding from his chest, was shot again and stabbed by another member of the group.
[25]Newspapers picked up the story, which became known as the Sandbar Fight.
Witness accounts all agreed that Bowie did not attack first, and the others had focused their attack on Bowie because "they considered him the most dangerous man among their opposition."
[17]There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same kind of knife now known as a Bowie knife.
[28] and many Bowie family members and "most authorities on the Bowie knife tend to believe it was invented by" Bowie's brother Rezin.
[29]After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie successfully used his knife to defend himself, his knife became very popular.
[30] His fame, and that of his knife, spread to England, and by the early 1830s many British knife manufacturers were producing Bowie knives, shipping many of them to the United States for sale.
[34] He was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith in San Antonio on April 28, 1828, sponsored by the San Antonio alcade (mayor) Juan Martin de Veramendi and his wife Josefa Navarro.
[35] After that he returned to his travels in Louisiana and Mississippi.
On February 20 Bowie and his friend took the oath of allegiance to Mexico and then proceeded to San Antonio de Bexar.
[36]Later that year, Bowie was elected a commander of the Texas Rangers.
[37]Bowie became a Mexican citizen on September 30, 1830, after promising to establish textile mills in the province of Coahuila y Tejas.
He convinced 14 or 15 other citizens to apply for land and turn it over to him, giving him 700,000 acres (2,834 km²) of land to speculate with.
[39] The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation.
At the time, Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $223,000, most of it in land with questionable titles.
[41] The couple built a house in San Antonio, on land de Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission.
After a short time, however, they moved into the Veramendi Palace, living with Ursula's parents, who supplied them with spending money.
[43] Shortly after his marriage he became fascinated with the story of the "lost" Los Almagres Mine, said to be west of San Antonio near the ruin of Santa Cruz de San Sabá Mission.
It was believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area, the Lipan Apaches took over the mines.
On November 2, 1831 with his brother Rezin and nine others, Bowie set out for San Saba.
[15][22]The group returned to San Antonio on December 10 and Bowie wrote a report, in Spanish, of the expedition.
[45] The following month Bowie set out again with a larger force.
The Indians had learned they were coming, however, and fled, and although Bowie and his group rode for several hundred miles, they "never saw an Indian."
[49] In July 1832 Bowie, who was in Natchez, heard that the Mexican commander of Nacogdoches, Jose de las Piedras, had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms.
[17] Bowie returned to Texas and on August 2, 1832 joined a group of other Texans in marching into Nacogdoches to "present their demands" to Piedras.
[49] Before the group reached the building housing the town officials, they were attacked by a force of 100 Mexican cavalry.
[49] After a second battle in which Piedras lost 33 men, the Mexican army evacuated during the night.
[51] Bowie, on business in Natchez, heard of his family's deaths in November.
[50]Bowie returned to land speculation in Texas in 1834 after the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in the state.
[17]Stephen F. Austin returned to Texas in September 1835 and was soon elected the commander of the volunteer army in Texas.
On the 28th of October, a Mexican force consisting of three hundred cavalry and a hundred infantry attacked Bowie and his 92 horsemen.
[52]The Alamo Houston received word that Mexican general Santa Anna was coming to San Antonio with a large force of soldiers.
On January 26, one of Bowie's men, James Bonham, organized a rally, which passed a resolution in favor of holding the Alamo.
[54]They were joined in the next few weeks by William Travis, with 30 men, and Davy Crockett, with 12 additional men.
[58] Santa Anna and his army reached the outskirts of San Antonio de Bexar several days later,[59] and the army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24.
Bowie asked that his cot be carried over the line, and Crockett and several others assisted him in joining the others.
After the conclusion of the battle, Santa Anna ordered the alcade of San Antonio, Francisco Antonio Ruiz, to confirm the identities of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
[72]LegacyDespite his continual pronouncements of wealth, after Bowie's death his actual estate was found to be very small.
His possessions were sold at auction and brought in only $99.50.
He is most often associated with the knife that bears his name.
