By the end of 1940, nothing had disturbed the original prediction of Frisch and Peierls that a bomb was possible, the separation of uranium-235 had been shown to be industrially feasible, and a route for producing plutonium-239 as a potentially valuable bomb material had been identified.
The first official contact between American and British nuclear research following the outbreak of the war in Europe took place in the Fall of 1940 when Sir Henry Tizard, accompanied by Professor J. D. Cockcroft, led a mission to Washington.
It was recognised that the project had to be set up on a more formal basis, and the Directorate of Tube Alloys-a title chosen as a cover name-was formed within the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research under the technical leadership of W. A. Akers, recruited from Imperial Chemical Industries, and the policy guidance of Sir John Anderson, Lord President of the Council.
On the basis of the report of the National Academy of Sciences, President Roosevelt ordered an all-out development programme under the administration of the newly created Office of Scientific Research and Development and endorsed a complete exchange of information with Britain.
Chadwick was occupied mostly in Washington with diplomatic and administrative functions but spent some time in Los Alamos; Peierls worked initially on gaseous diffusion but later at Los Alamos; and Oliphant, with three colleagues, worked at Berkeley with Lawrence's electromagnetic team; a further two scientists were attached to Los Alamos.
The British team which joined Lawrence at Berkeley built up rapidly to about 35 and was completely integrated into the American group; most stayed until the end of the war.
The British team assembled at Los Alamos finally numbered 19, and, as at Berkeley, the scientists were assigned to existing groups in the Laboratory (although not to those groups concerned with the preparation of plutonium and its chemistry and metallurgy).
The first British scientists to They included Frisch, who led the Anglo American group that first demonstrated the critical mass of uranium-235, and E. Bretscher, who found a niche in the group already thinking about fusion weapons.
There is no objective way of measuring the contribution made by the British to the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos and elsewhere.
General Groves often acknowledged the importance of the early work in the United Kingdom and the substantial contribution made by her scientists in America, but he added that the United States could have got along without them.
The course of the British nuclear programme in the postwar period would have been very different had it not been for the wartime collaboration.
