Tourism itself is a complicated concept bringing about both positive and negative effects (Hitchcock, King, & Parnwell 1994;Rigg 1991).
Culture itself is difficult to define.
For the purposes of this report, we define culture through the role of identity: belonging to a distinct ethnic, cultural or sub-cultural group (Kidd 2002).
Tourism can also provide a way of ensuring authenticity and continuity of culture (Picard 1997).
The subject of the state using ethnic tourism for economic benefits has many problems, most notably in the way different governments embrace tourism and how they approach tourism development (Smith 2003;Sofield 2003).
These are then presented differently to local, domestic and international audiences.
Other determinants that may influence such constructions of national identity, such as political issues should also be considered (Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
This report draws on the study, characterising the complexity of Indonesian identity within the context of a UNESCO World Heritage site.
It comments on the multiple identities that have been created to unite the multiple cultures and languages from across the archipelago under the concept of Indonesia.
This concept of Indonesia is then developed further to market the country for tourism purposes.
The report concludes with a discussion of some of the key study themes in relation to the research findings and other literature.
Study Site
This research study focused on one site in Indonesia.
Indonesia is an archipelago of over 17,000 islands situated in Southeast Asia.
Borobudur temple, a UNESCO World Heritage site, was selected as the study area.
Dating back to the 8th century, Borobudur is a large Buddhist monument consisting of six square terraces with intricately carved narrative panels, topped by three circular terraces with 72 Buddhas sat in individual latticed stupas (Boccardi, Brroks, & Gurang 2006;Mus & Mac Donald 1998).
The awarding of UNESCO World Heritage site status in 1974 has resulted in the site becoming an archaeological park with local people becoming displaced during extensive conservation efforts.
The site continues to be developed as a tourist attraction for both domestic and international tourists.
In addition, encouraging local community involvement in the development process continues to be a source of conflict between the provincial Central Javanese Government, UNESCO and the local communities (Black & Wall 2001).
Borobudur still carries religious connotations especially for those within the Buddhist community.
MethodsInterviews were conducted on site with three types of participants: domestic tourists, international tourists and local people.
International tourists have been defined as tourists who are not Indonesian citizens and do not reside in Indonesia.
Local people are defined as anyone living within the temple complex or Yogyakarta area.
The designation as a World Heritage site has brought both positive and negative experiences to all those who use the site.
It is clear that the landscaped areas stand in place of demolished villages, whilst there appears to be a clash in catering towards the different users of the site.
Furthermore, the manipulation of culture and the archaeological site for touristic purposes can be seen throughout the temple complex.
Local population Local participants described the difficulty in trying to make a living through the selling of goods to tourists.
They described how economic, political and religious instability can affect their livelihood through decreasing numbers in tourists.
Some participants felt angered and frustrated with both the government and those responsible for causing much of the religious tension.
On the whole, local participants perceived that it was better to have some tourists than none at all.
The relocation of many locals to new homes away from the temple site has resulted in the loss of space to sell their goods.
This has resulted in many vendors to approach tourists directly in the car park to save on rental costs.
International tourists Participants in this group provided a mixed response to their overall experience of the site.
Several participants felt intimidated and overwhelmed by what they felt were the aggressive selling of goods upon arrival at the site.
In addition, several participants thought this detracted from the overall experience of the site and suggested that the experience would be more authentic, less stressful and more enjoyable if the vendors and market were removed:“It’s such a shame that they have that awful market at the front of the temple.
It really is an eyesore
and I don’t think it adds to the overall temple vision.”
This was reiterated by another participant:“I think the place would be more authentic without all those people hassling you at the beginning.
I don’t really care if it is or isn’t.
Domestic tourists Domestic tourists make up the majority of tourists that visit the site.
Furthermore, all domestic tourists that took part in the study were part of some form of tour group.
One participant commented:“I don’t really see it [Borobudur] as being part of my own heritage, maybe Indonesian history.
One of the problems faced by the Indonesian government is the ongoing promotion of a national identity under the slogan ‘Unity in diversity’.
The promotion of Indonesia as a tourist site results in a situation where the government shapes and controls the tourist encounter (Adams 2003;Picard & Wood 1997).
As a result, culture can become a political weapon when the dominant role of the state is threatened.
The Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) was created in 1989 to undertake the task of promoting Indonesian and Indonesian products both internationally and domestically (Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism 2007;Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
For international tourists, Indonesia is marketed as an exotic holiday location compared to the educational ‘visit your heritage’ marketing approach is used for domestic tourists.
For Borobudur temple, UNESCO is involved not only in the marketing but also in the management and conservation of the site.
Designated as a cultural rather than religious site by the Indonesian government (Nuriyanti 1999), the conservation of a World Heritage site is a responsibility shared between the international, national and local communities.
This illustrates the conflicting views of the different actors involved in the park’s development.
For UNESCO, a shopping mall would not contribute to the site’s archaeological experience and in some ways detract from the cultural heritage of the park.
However, the local governments felt that a shopping mall would attract more tourists to the area.
It became clear during this research study that the local people have not been respected or represented throughout the past and present conservation and development process.
The values that local people attach to this site are different than those attributed by government officials, conservationists and historians (Wall & Black 2004).
It is important to remember that Borobudur is not only a source of income to the state and provincial governments, but also provides income to the local people both in the immediate area and those in the city of Yogyakarta close by.
The results suggest that it is possible that local people may not have benefited at all since the implementation of turning the temple into an archaeological park.
This is in part due to the top-down approaches to the conservation, development and planning of the park.
Even though local involvement and participation in the decision making process of site development is encouraged; the results from interviewing local people suggest that little effort has been done by other stakeholders to involve the local population at Borobudur temple.
This was also found in Black and Wall ( 2001) study which looked at global-local relationships in the planning process across several UNESCO World Heritage sites.
However, changes in attitudes by all actors involved will be necessary before tangible results can be seen.
Local residents must be seen as having something positive to offer, not only through their historical and cultural ties to the site, but also as caretakers and conservationists (Picard 1996;Wall & Black 2004)There is still a need to resolve the conflicts between different stakeholders in the way Borobudur is interpreted, presented and marketed not only to tourists, but also on a national and international scale.
ConclusionIn attempting to explore how Borobudur fits into the construct of Indonesian identity, it was found that Indonesia itself is a construction with several identities being played out simultaneously at the global and local level.
Thus, continuing the evolutionary process in order to meet the ongoing needs of creating both national Indonesian and marketing identities.
Tourism has played an important role within Indonesia’s economic development.
It provides a source of income to both the state and the local communities that live around Borobudur temple.
Engagement and collaboration between the different stakeholders involved in the park’s management and the local population is needed to address some of the issues that have arisen from the site’s development.
