Holidays in Egypt Taking your holidays in Egypt is the best value for money and you get a chance to experience and see 7,000 years of history and civilization.
Taking a moment to realize that Egypt is more than 7,000 years old and was home to one of the best documented civilizations of the world, is breath taking on its own.
Across the centuries and millennia there have been numerous cultures and peoples who have lived in Egypt and ruled it too.
The result of that nowadays, are the leftover monuments and memoirs representing cultural diversity, human life and survival through it all.
Egypt’s location, overlooking the Mediterranean Sea from its northern tip and the Red Sea from its eastern side, with the river Nile splitting it down the middle, gives Egypt a striking and strategic position.
You can say it is in the center of the world and is the cradle of civilization.
This location ensures Egypt’s wide selection and variety of beaches, resorts and cities by the river, making your holiday in Egypt an unforgettable one.
Starting by telling you about Egypt’s capital and the biggest city in Africa only makes sense.
Cairo is home to 17 million people and attracts professionals, families and young vibrant students from all over the world looking to learn Arabic or immerse themselves in Egyptian culture.
This multicultural city, spread over on either side of the Nile, is home to Pharaonic, Islamic and Coptic monuments as well as statues and streets from the turn of the century and the Ottoman Empire.
Downtown and Zamalek districts are famous for their beautiful European style architecture, giving downtown Cairo the title of “Paris along the Nile”.
Cairo is a vibrant city that never sleeps full of restaurants, cafes and food stands.
Walking through the crowds of people, cars and microbuses and embracing the randomness of the city is one of the most interesting experiences some come to find.
Outside of Cairo, people also enjoy taking a daytrip to Fayoum to see the oasis and the beautiful lakes along with waterfalls and natural scenery.
Tour Egypt offers you diversity, passion, and fun.
Through customized packages that fit your needs and budget, whatever your heart craves Tour Egypt guarantees.
We can give you cheap budget deals, tips and guide you through your holidays in Egypt.
Find out more about our all inclusive packages through the website, where our specialists strive to make your visit unforgettable.
Have your next holiday in Egypt and enjoy all the beauty this country has to offer.
Holidays in Egypt Holidays in Cairo, Aswan and Luxor (7 Days / 6 Nights)Holidays in Cairo, Aswan, Luxor and Alexandria (10 Days / 9 Nights)Holidays in Cairo, Aswan, Luxor and Hurghada(10 Days / 9 Nights)Holidays in Cairo, Aswan Luxor Hurghada and Alexandria (14 Days / 13 Nights)Holidays in Cairo, Aswan Luxor Sharm El Sheikh and Alexandria (14 Days / 13 Nights)