Gervase Jackson-Stops.
The impressive towers and broad moat of Bodiam Castle are like a scene from a fantasy as you gaze at them for the very first time.
At a quick glance it appears to be the very epitome of a medieval castle, untilcloser inspection is given.
One soon discovers that it was built at an evolutionary stage when the Nobility were looking for more comfortable, agreeable places to live that offered them security, but alsorepresented an outward show of their wealth and rank.
Castles built in this period were the last truecastles to be built in England, they provided security and also separate suites of rooms for the Lord, his domestic staff, guests and garrison.
This was the time of the 'Free Companies' or 'Routiers', private mercenary armies who would normally be under thecontrol of the King but who now sold their services to the highest bidder.
They indulged in looting and destruction on an appalling scale with many men gaining great wealth and notoriety from such expeditions.
At this time in the history of the Hundred Years War, there was a rise in the more professional soldier.
Men such as Bertrand du Guesclin, Sir Thomas Dagworth, Sir Robert Knolles and Sir Hugh Calveley all became commanders of the so called 'Free Companies', acting sometimes with the blessingof their King and sometimes without, but all the time causing havoc and destruction wherever they operated in France.
It was under the command of Robert Knolles that the builder of Bodiam Castle built his reputation and wealth.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was something of a character in his day, he belonged to an old established Sussex family who came from present day Dalling Ridge, near East Grinstead, but returned from France in 1377 much more wealthier and powerful.
The site was excavated in the 60's and 70's and pottery finds indicated it wasin use from the late 13th century until the building of the Castle.
The Wardeux family had acquired the manor by marriage to the de Bodeham family, who had held it since the conquest when it was given to Hugh of Eu.
He gave it to his son who took the name de Bodeham from the name of the Saxon settlement on the site.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was a Knight for the Shire of Sussex for 10 Parliments between 1379 and 1388 and was without doubt one of the most powerful men in Sussex at this time, along with his Patron the Earl of Arundel.
England at the end of the 14th century was seriously under threat of invasion from the French; the victories of Crecy and Poitiers were a distant memory as the French slowly clawed back her possessions.
Piracy was rife in the channel and in 1377 Rye and Winchelsea were both sacked and burned.
In 1380 Dalyngrigge was part of a Kings commission to consider the state of the country, its possessions and expenses ofthe Royal Household.
In the same year he was also appointed to survey the town of Winchelsea and consider how it may be fortified against the French.
He was probably more guilty of piracy and pillage in the past than the French raiders he wascommanded to keep out!
Hastings was also attacked soon after and in answer to this on 21 October 1385, Dalyngrigge was given licence to ;"Crenellate his house to protect the inland reaches of the Rother and halt the French advances"At this time many castles and manor houses were either rebuilt of fortified such as Cooling Castle and Scotney Castle to counter any invasion.
Dalyngrigge combined the best features of these together with thosehe had first hand experience of in France to build Bodiam.
He was unlikely to have been at Bodiam during the initial stages of building, as he was appointed Captain of the French port of Brest between 1386-87.
By1390 the threat of invasion had receded and Sir Edward was appointed to several commissions, one to conclude a truce with the King of France and another to survey the Castles and fortresses of Calais and Picardy.
In the same year he was one of nine Knights who put their Seal to a letter to the Pope deploring the excesses of the Church.
In 1395 he was to further improve his status when appointed by the King as Keeper ofthe Tower of London and Governor of the City.
Dalyngrigge was no doubt living in his newly built Castle by this time, but wasn't to enjoy it for long.
He died in 1395 and was succeeded by his son, Sir John Dalyngrigge.
The information we have on the early life of Bodiam is rather obscure and what information we do have is largely thanks to Lord Curzon .
He brought together all the information for the first time in his book " Bodiam Castle" published in 1926, and it is thanks to his excellent research that we know what we do of the castle today.
The castle was to remain in the Dalyngrigge family until 1483 when it came to another famous Sussex family, The Lewknors by marriage.
The castle was given up without a struggle and no damage was done to its walls.
At the time of the civil war it was in the hands of John Hufton, 2nd Earl of Thanet.
There is no damage to any of the exterior walls and shows no sign of bombardment, the only damage visible is in theinterior.
The Castle was only inhabited again during a brief period in the 18th Century when a small cottage was erected inside, by the Postern Tower.
A local Squire from Brightling, John 'Mad Jack' Fuller, rescued the Castle in 1815.
The Castle was going to be dismantled when Fuller paid £3000 to save it from destruction.
Fuller was a huge, fat man who was anMP for many years in Sussex.
He was thrown out of Parliament on several occasions for his unruly behavior, and many of his follies litter the landscape around Brightling.
It is said that he is buried in the centre, sitting in hisfavorite chair, wearing top hat and tails with a bottle of his best Claret and a cooked chicken!
The Castle was sold again in 1864 by Fuller's grandson for £5000 to Lord Ashcombe, who undertook many vital repairs over the next 40 years.
It wasn't until 1916 that he was able to negotiate its sale.
Curzon embarked on a grand programme of research and restoration with his Architect William Weir and it is thanks to him that we can allenjoy this beautiful castle today.
He left it in his will to The National Trust who have continued his work.
Hours - Feb-Nov 10 until 6 or dusk if earlier.
Nov- Feb 10 until 4.
Closed on Monday.
Telephone - 01892 - 891001.
Site Office.
Os Map 199: ref TQ 782256.
Bodiam Castle The Castle has excellent car parking facilities and can be also reached by a No 349 Bus from Hastings Station.
There is wheelchair access to the Castle but not the Towers.
Dogs are permitted on the site but not allowed in the Castle.
Picnics are welcome to be taken in the grounds but not in the castle.
Bodiam Castle is one of the most famous and evocative in Britain and is probably the most ideal for a visit with children.
An excellent Guidebook is available on the castle and its history along with many giftsand books for children in a well-stocked shop.
There is also has a very reasonable restaurant alongside although these are only open from February until the end of October.
Winter is not so busy and a visit on a fine, crisp, winters day can be a very rewarding.
Although the exterior is in excellentcondition some may find the interior a little disappointing, for these people, I leave you with the words of Lord Curzon:"At Bodiam, not only does the watery cincture remain, but no trace of the modern world appears to invade the ancient and solitary beauty of the scene.
Or even the flash of spearheads and the clatter of iron-shod hooves to indicate the exit of a party with more serious intent.
" Information was obtained from The Hundred Years War - Christopher Allmand.
The Hundred Years War - The English in France - Desmond Seward.
Castles in Sussex - John Guy.
Bodiam Castle - Lord Curzon of Kedleston.
Fuller, The Life and Times of John Fuller of Brightling - Geoff Hutchinson Plantagenet Encyclopeadia - Elizabeth Hallem Sussex - Desmond Seward Sussex Place Names - Judith Glover The National Trust Handbook - 1998.
