Playing host to many a ghost By P. Lal The chapel drawing room where the White Lady announces her presence with a strong floral fragrance.
"THE only spirits at the Police College are those behind the bar", said the Chief Superintendent, and laughed as a trainee police officer from India narrated to him his experience of that morning of an encounter with a spirit in the chapel drawing room of the Bramshill, housing the most prestigious Police College of Britain.
That morning in October, 1986, as the police officer from India, under training at the Bramshill, was passing through the huge chapel drawing room, he came across an area where he smelt a fragrance, pleasing and soft.
There was no doubt the fragrance was there.
He walked back into the area in front of the cushioned chairs, to find again that it held the scent.
However, when he walked into this area the sixth time and thereafter, the fragrance had gone, as if the invisible source had moved away!
The Chief Superintendent volunteered the information that the Bramshill House was haunted by no less than 14 spirits and that the most important feature of the White Lady was that she announced her presence with a strong floral fragrance, the smell of the arum lilies or the lily-of-the-valley.
It was intended to be used as royal palace by Henry, son of James I.
The longest continuous period under one owner was from 1699 to 1935 when it was owned by eight generations of the Cope family.
The story of the White Lady is fascinating and tragic.
One legend has it that when the chest was in Italy, Genevre Orsini, who was 15, had suffered the ghastly fate described above in 1727.
The family of King Michael of Romania, which stayed at the Bramshill from 1950 to 1952, felt the presence of the White Lady.
An exorcism had had no effect.
Yet another ghost, the Grey Lady, so named because of her grey coloured robe, is said to be the ghost of one of the members of the Cope family.
The ‘husband of the Grey Lady’ has also been felt.
It is said to be the ghost of a member of the Cope family who drowned in the lake in 1806.
Ronald had died in tragic circumstances 30 years back.
The panelled hall with the mistletoe bough chest is haunted by the ghost of old man with a long beard, and the chapel drawing room by the ghost of a woman from the days of Queen Anne.
It is an interesting fact that this particular floor was lowered during structural alterations, and it would appear that the ghosts walk at the same level where they had walked earlier.
There is also a path in the grounds of the Bramshill haunted by ‘the Gardener’, who was drowned in a lake in the north-west side.
In 1972, a college security officer saw from the hall a man in a grey flannel suit on the path outside, walking towards the mansion.
The part of the wall through which the man had walked, there used to be an archway, which had been blocked and plastered years ago.
