Bramshill House Bramshill House: Location Bramshill House Location of Bramshill House in Hampshire Bramshill House is located at the approximate centre of a triangular shape formed by Reading, Basingstoke and Farnborough, about 47 miles by road southwest of central London.
Three main lanes approach the property: Mansion Drive from the B3011 in the southwest, Reading Drive South from the B3011 to the east of Bramshill village from the north, and the shorter Pheasantry Drive which approaches it from the southeast from Chalwin's Copse, just north of the course of the River Hart.
In the early 14th century, Sir John Foxley, Baron of the Exchequer,, built and endowed a chapel in the village of Bramshill.
His first wife, Constance de Bramshill, may have been the heiress of the Bramshill family.
Based on the similarity of the surviving vaults under Bramshill House and those under what became the servants' hall and steward's room at Windsor Castle, it may have been a copy of William of Wykeham's work there.
Giles's son Henry Daubeney sold the property to Henry VIII, and in 1547 Edward VI granted the estate to William Paulet, whose heirs sold it in 1600 to Sir Stephen Thornhurst of Agnes Court, Kent.
New manor house In March 1605, Edward la Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche, a favourite of James I, bought the property from Thornhurst.
James Zouch, grandson of Edward la Zouche, sold the property to the Earl of Antrim in 1637, at which time the house's furniture was valued at £2,762.
In 1673 it was the property of his son, Sir Andrew Henley, 1st Baronet.
The Cope family shortened the wings on the south side in 1703, converted most of the chapel to a drawing room and introduced a mezzanine on the west side during the 18th century.
It was used by the Red Cross as a maternity home during the Second World War, after which it became the home of the exiled King Michael and Queen Anne of Romania for several years.
Bramshill House became a Grade I listed building on 8 July 1952, and was acquired by the British government the following year as a dedicated site for police training.
Bramshill House is three storeys high on the southern main entrance side and two storeys high to the north and east.
The central bay is crowned by an ornamental pierced parapet below a niched Dutch gable, which shelters a small statue of Lord Zouche or James I. Thorpe originally intended the main entrance of the house to be on this side, building on the gatehouse of the earlier Foxley house.
It is three storeys high and features three sets of three bays in either wing, with five inner sections.
The inner two sections feature the same layout on the first and top floors with eight windows aligned in rows of four on the first floor and four windows on the top floor, but the ground floor features two arches, which form part of the central loggia.
The terrace is bounded by a 3 feet 3 inches high balustrade.
It features four full-height angular bays with two windows between, while its upper walls have two arches set within a rectangular panel.
On this side there is a Troco Terrace with a lawn, as well as two arcaded openings at the side on either wing of the house.
The ground floor contains, in the west section, the former dining room and kitchen.
The openings in the wall between the billiard room and the garden room had been blocked up but the rooms were reconnected in the 19th century under Sir William Henry Cope, uncovering an original doorway with a four-centred pointed arch.
It has a dais and a Jacobean stone screen, 13 feet high, decorated with 92 shields.
During the time of the Cope family in the 1880s, the kitchen near the south hall was used as a dairy.
Drawing room and library The drawing room, containing four bay windows of different sizes, is panelled with oak for its entire height of about 16 feet.
The upper panel is 2 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 4 inches ; the lower, 2 feet 7 inches by 2 feet 6 inches.
It is two storeys in height, the lower being Doric and the upper Ionic.
The distribution of the members is regular, and the shafts of the columns are variegated marble.
The fireplace is 6 feet wide and 4 feet 8 inches high, and retains the ancient andirons, used for burning wood.
Staircase and first floor The standards and balusters of the stairs on the north side of the hall came from Eversley Manor House and probably date to the mid-17th century, although the treads are original to the house and possibly mid-16th-century.
The room has an ornamental ceiling with a Renaissance chimneypiece.
Also on the first floor is the "Chapel Drawing Room" in the south wing, connected to the Drawing Room.
The tapestry in the chapel room is older than the house, and was assessed by an expert as dating to 1450 or earlier; in the early 19th century it had hung in the Red Drawing Room.
ConclusionBramshill House, south façade with oriel window in centre Bramshill House, in Bramshill, northeast Hampshire, England, is one of the largest and most important Jacobean prodigy house mansions in England.
It was built in the early 17th century by Baron Edward la Zouche of Harringworth, but was partly destroyed by fire a few years later.
The house was designated a Grade I listed building in 1952.
The mansion's southern façade is notable for its decorative architecture, which includes at its centre a large oriel window above the principal entrance.
Interior features include a great hall displaying 92 coats of arms on a Jacobean screen, an ornate drawing room, and a 126.5-foot long gallery containing many portraits.
Numerous columns and friezes are found throughout the mansion, while several rooms have large tapestries depicting historical figures and events on their panelled walls.
The house is set in 262-acre of grounds containing an 18-acre lake.
