Playing host to many a ghost By P. Lal The chapel drawing room where the White Lady announces her presence with a strong floral fragrance.
The mistletoe-bough chest, where the bride hid herself and got entombed.
"THE only spirits at the Police College are those behind the bar", said the Chief Superintendent, and laughed as a trainee police officer from India narrated to him his experience of that morning of an encounter with a spirit in the chapel drawing room of the Bramshill, housing the most prestigious Police College of Britain.
They were having lunch in the Nuffield Hall, and the Chief Superintendent on the staff, seated next to the officer having thus cracked the joke, added with a wink, "My dear friend, the White Lady who has been haunting the Bramshill since the 17th century seems to have fallen in love with you!"
That morning in October, 1986, as the police officer from India, under training at the Bramshill, was passing through the huge chapel drawing room, he came across an area where he smelt a fragrance, pleasing and soft.
He stopped there.
There was no doubt the fragrance was there.
He stepped aside a few steps.
There was no trace of any fragrance then.
He walked back into the area in front of the cushioned chairs, to find again that it held the scent.
He eyed the flower pots on the windows, and went up to them and put his nose to the plants.
However, when he walked into this area the sixth time and thereafter, the fragrance had gone, as if the invisible source had moved away!
The thought that it might have been a spirit made the hair on the back of his back bristle.
The Chief Superintendent volunteered the information that the Bramshill House was haunted by no less than 14 spirits and that the most important feature of the White Lady was that she announced her presence with a strong floral fragrance, the smell of the arum lilies or the lily-of-the-valley.
It was intended to be used as royal palace by Henry, son of James I.
The longest continuous period under one owner was from 1699 to 1935 when it was owned by eight generations of the Cope family.
The story of the White Lady is fascinating and tragic.
It is said to be the spirit of a young bride who, married on a Christmas eve, played the game of hide-and-seek with her husband and guests.
She hid herself somewhere, and was nowhere to be found.
One legend has it that when the chest was in Italy, Genevre Orsini, who was 15, had suffered the ghastly fate described above in 1727.
The family of King Michael of Romania, which stayed at the Bramshill from 1950 to 1952, felt the presence of the White Lady.
An exorcism had had no effect.
Yet another ghost, the Grey Lady, so named because of her grey coloured robe, is said to be the ghost of one of the members of the Cope family.
One story has it that her husband, a dissenter, was brought to the Bramshill in the early 17th century, where he was interrogated, summarily tried and immediately thereafter beheaded.
The ‘husband of the Grey Lady’ has also been felt.
It is said to be the ghost of a member of the Cope family who drowned in the lake in 1806.
At the time of the death, he was dressed in green from head to knee.
In 1976, a security officer on night patrol encountered a ghost, believed to be Ronald, the son of the Bramshill’s last private owner Lord Brocket.
Ronald had died in tragic circumstances 30 years back.
The panelled hall with the mistletoe bough chest is haunted by the ghost of old man with a long beard, and the chapel drawing room by the ghost of a woman from the days of Queen Anne.
There is an adjoining room with the lady ghost in a tight bodice and a full skirt.
It is an interesting fact that this particular floor was lowered during structural alterations, and it would appear that the ghosts walk at the same level where they had walked earlier.
There is also a path in the grounds of the Bramshill haunted by ‘the Gardener’, who was drowned in a lake in the north-west side.
Dogs smell something as soon as they come to the tunnel formed by the intertwining branches of overgrown trees, and avoid going through the tunnel.
In 1972, a college security officer saw from the hall a man in a grey flannel suit on the path outside, walking towards the mansion.
The man came in through the open door, crossed the hall and went straight through the wall opposite, not to reappear.
The part of the wall through which the man had walked, there used to be an archway, which had been blocked and plastered years ago.
