She has lived in the US and Germany and is currently based in Moscow.
She studied political reporting at the Washington Center for Politics & Journalism in Washington, DC and also has a degree in business and German.
The You Gov poll found 43 percent of respondents felt the empire had been a “good” thing while 19 percent said it was “bad”.
It’s about the fact that they — too many of them — don’t actually know their history.
The history of the empire is not widely taught in UK schools — and what is taught is a watered-down or varnished version of the truth.
On the subject of the British Empire, he said: “You need to get the story from the people where the empire expanded into, rather than those that came there to take control of it.”
But Corbyn is not the only one to take issue with Britain’s history curriculum.
Ashley Jackson, Professor of Imperial and Military History at King's College London, told the Independent that, understandably, “a lot of British people would like to think that the imperial past was generally okay, but unfortunately if you look at the record of empire it’s very difficult to say that overall it was a good thing.”
Andrea Major, an associate professor in British colonial history at the University of Leeds said there was a “collective amnesia about the levels of violence, exploitation and racism involved in many aspects of imperialism” and that “better education” and “more open public debate” was needed.
Let’s call it the “Look over there!”
approach.
The bad is downplayed to near irrelevance, while the good is magnified.
When bombs dropped by the US or UK kill civilians, it is denied or passed off as a terrible mistake.
Look what they did!
Visiting Amritsar in 2013, Cameron argued that it would not be right to “reach back into history” and reasoned that it was enough that the event had already been “rightly criticized” at the time, adding that there was still an “enormous amount” to be proud of in what the empire was responsible for.
Westerners are astounded to learn that Russians could have any positive feelings at all regarding the Stalin era — and they’re not shy about blaming Putin and labeling him a modern-day reincarnation of the dictator himself.
That is for many reasons — but the overriding one is simply that we in the West are allowed to be unapologetically proud of our histories.
Britons are proud of an empire they know little about.
It can rarely be discussed in ‘all good’ or ‘all bad’ terms.
The same can be said for modern-day Britain and its understanding of the Empire.
The statements, views and opinions expressed in this column are solely those of the author and do not necessarily represent those of RT.
