Mark Oliphant Biography Mark Oliphant (1901–2000) was considered a great leader in the sciences, one who inspired his students by his own show of zeal for his research and his positive view of life in general.
Born and Raised in Australia Oliphant was born Markus Laurence Elwin Oliphant on October 8, 1901, in Adelaide, Australia.
Oliphant's father was a very religious man and he wanted his oldest son to be a priest, but Oliphant had always been more interested in gadgets and science than in religion.
After a short while Oliphant agreed, and he graduated with a degree in physics.
To pay for his education he took any odd job he could find, working his way through university.
He was so impressed by what Rutherford had to say that he immediately decided that if he could possibly bring it about, he would work for Rutherford one day.
Rutherford worked at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, England, one of the most advanced research facilities in nuclear power at that time.
In 1927 Oliphant won an exhibition prize at Adelaide University, and then was accepted to Cambridge University.
It was this discovery of fusion that led the way to the hydrogen bomb, although Oliphant never wanted nor intended the knowledge to be used in such a way.
It was American scientist Edward Teller who used Oliphant's knowledge to build the atom bomb.
In 1937 Oliphant took a position with the University of Birmingham, where he became a professor of physics.
He there met Ernest Lawrence, who taught Oliphant how to build a 60-inch cyclotron.
World War II Brought About Atom Bomb In 1940
two men, Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls, who also worked at the University of Birmingham, theorized that uranium-235 could be used to create an atom bomb.
Because of his efforts, the United States established the Office of Scientific Research and Development.
After the use of the bomb in 1945 on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, however, he was appalled by the devastation, and argued against its ever being used again. "
Although he had been sent to press America to build a bomb, no one at the time knew how devastating such a bomb would be, and Oliphant has said he would not have pressed for its creation if he had known.
It was while he was there that he first heard how the atom bomb was used and exactly how powerful it was.
Like so many of the scientists who had worked on the project, Oliphant had never expected that the bomb's effects would be so devastating.
The Economist wrote, "Like many of the scientists who helped to make the atomic bomb, Mark Oliphant expressed dismay when it was used to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Returned to Australia and Knighted Because of his anti-nuclear weapons stance, Oliphant was often left out of scientific experiments involving nuclear power.
Because of the work he did during the war, Oliphant was given a Congressional Medal of Freedom with Gold Palm, but the Australian government vetoed the honor.
There he became the first director of the Research School of Physical Sciences at the new Australian National University in Canberra.
Became State Governor of South Australia
He retired from the Australian National University in 1967.
He accepted the honor and held office from 1971 to 1976.
In 1977 he was made a Companion in the Order of Australia.
Oliphant died in Canberra on July 14, 2000, at the age of 98.
He will be remembered as the scientist who unwillingly helped to build the atomic bomb, but who stuck by his principles in trying to stop the further development and use of nuclear weapons.
Time International , October 25, 1999; July 31, 2000.
