The Manhattan Project World War II started on September 1 1939, when Germany attacked Poland.
By 1941, the Germans were ahead in the race for the atomic bomb.
He described the possibility that such bombs could be delivered by ship, although he was skeptical that such weapons could be delivered by air.
On May 12, 1942, President Roosevelt signed an order creating a secret project to develop the nuclear weapon.
The program that developed the atomic bomb for the United States during World War II was the largest secret project ever undertaken by the U.S. government.
Since it was frequently the case the US Army Corps of Engineers offices were named for the city in which they were based, it was renamed Manhattan Engineering District, which became known as the Manhattan Project.
The first atomic bombs were designed and built at a site in Los Alamos, NM, which was in a remote location and had existing buildings from its days as a school.
Known as "the hill," Los Alamos produced two bombs, one was a gun-type weapon and the second used implosion to detonate plutonium.
The Manhattan Project produced three bombs: the first bomb was known as "Gadget" and was used as a test model.
The second bomb, known as "Little Boy" was detonated over the city of Hiroshima, and the final bomb, "Fat Man" was detonated over the city of Nagasaki.
Many scientists who had produced the atomic bombs were against its use and argued to the end that the bomb should not be used for ethical reasons.
Faced with the prospect of continued annihilation of its cities, as well as not knowing that the U.S. had no other atomic bombs ready to deploy, Japan surrendered unconditionally on August 15, 1945.
The history of the Manhattan Project remained classified for many years.
Since the official flag raising on July 9, 1945, the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico (WSMR) has become an integral part of global defense for ...Making of the Atomic Bomb by Richard Rhodes.
Ellen Klages's award-winning debut novel is now in paperback!
When the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, few could have anticipated its potential for devastation.
Pulitzer prize-winning author John Hersey rec...109 East Palace: Robert Oppenheimer and the Secret City of Los Alamos by Jennet Conant.
Known as the "atomic ...Atomic Tragedy:
Henry L. Stimson and the Decision to Use the Bomb Against Japan by Sean L. Malloy.
