When Rudolf was fourteen years old his mother died of Hodgkin's disease, and his father married Else Hermann (who was not Jewish) soon after.
Peierls wanted to follow a career in engineering but his father doubted that his son had the necessary dexterity and practical skills to excel in this, so he put pressure on Rudolf to enrol in physics courses.
Notice that he still wanted to study experimental physics rather than theoretical physics, but practical subjects were in such high demand at Berlin University that the university authorities prevented students taking them in their first year.
After a year at Berlin, Peierls moved to the Department of Theoretical Physics in Munich University in 1926.
It was Sommerfeld who introduced Peierls to quantum mechanics during these two years and this proved highly significant for Peierls' career.
Peierls' next move was to the Theoretical Physics Department of Leipzig University in 1928, mainly as a result of Sommerfeld leaving Munich for a world tour.
In the summer of 1930 Peierls went to a conference in Odessa where he met not only with Lev Landau, but also many of his colleagues.
Peierls was awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship and he spent the first half of the year 1932-33 in Rome with Enrico Fermi, and the second half in England where he worked at Cambridge with Paul Dirac and Ralph Fowler.
His next position was a two year fellowship held at Cambridge, following which, in 1937, he accepted a professorship in mathematical physics at Birmingham University.
The deteriorating political situation in Germany led to Peierls attempting to gain British citizenship in May 1938 and, at the same time, he tried to reject his German citizenship.
However, undertaking war work was still difficult and this would prove particularly so when, together with Otto Frisch (an Austrian), he made it known to the British government through the 3-page Frisch-Peierls memorandum that he had the theoretical knowledge to make an atomic bomb from uranium-235 a possibility.
Soon, however, the realisation that it was impossible to prevent the two scientists who had proposed the idea from knowing about it came home to the committee and Peierls and Frisch were invited as members of a technical subcommittee.
During these years, he also worked as a consultant to the British atomic programme at Harwell where Klaus Fuchs, who had worked closely with him on the atomic bomb project, now held a senior position.
By now he was feeling that he had been in Birmingham long enough and was looking for a challenge.
However, he did not rush to accept which he did not do until the following year, only taking up the position in 1963.
He worked in Oxford until he retired in 1974, then spent the period between February and May of each of the next three years at the University of Washington.
The list of other places he visited in the years following his retirement is too long to give here.
For his wartime contributions he was made a Commander of the British Empire in 1946, but the most pleasing honour of all was a Knighthood in 1968 since it gave him an acceptance by the British establishment after many years of unfair suspicion.
In 1997, two years after his death, Selected scientific papers of Sir Rudolf Peierls was published.
An inveterate traveller, he was well acquainted with nearly all the distinguished mathematical and theoretical physicists of his time and worked with many of them; he also had many young friends and research students who achieved distinction.
This valuable book features a selection of 72 of the much larger number of scientific papers and lectures that Peierls contributed to the scientific literature, and includes translations into English of his early work as well as personal comments by the author which modestly evaluate the importance of most of the papers.
However, it is remarkable how many of these papers have played a crucial role for the subsequent development of their subjects ...
We end this biography by looking briefly at his two books Surprises in theoretical physics (1979) and More surprises in theoretical physics (1991).
The topics covered are mostly from quantum theory and its applications; statistical physics and even relativity are touched upon.
