On Being Indonesian: Heritage Tourism at Borobudur Temple An extract of the full Paper is reproduced below.
For the full Dissertation, including Bibliography and Footnotes a PDF Download will be made available shortly Author: Stephanie Steels Follow @StephanieSteelsIntroductionAs we take advantage of cheap holiday deals, travel agents, luxury hotels and organised tours, we forget who controls these aspects of our need to ‘get away’ and what effect it may have on the local people whose countries we invade for our own pleasure.
Tourism itself is a complicated concept bringing about both positive and negative effects (Hitchcock, King, & Parnwell 1994;Rigg 1991).
Therefore, understanding tourism is important if the growth in the tourist industry is to remain sustainable and the negative impact on world cultures are to be minimised (Yamashita, Din, & Eades 1997).
These issues are made more complex through the globalisation process and the commercialisation of culture (Lash & Lury 2007;Milner 1994).
Culture itself is difficult to define.
There are many different theories and definitions which have been described and debated elsewhere (Kidd 2002;Radcliffe 2006;Sturken & Cartwright 2001;Urry 2002).
For the purposes of this report, we define culture through the role of identity: belonging to a distinct ethnic, cultural or sub-cultural group (Kidd 2002).
This is because this report explores the notion of Indonesian identity, of which culture is inextricably linked.
Culture can become transformed when displayed in the context of consumerism, economic development, tourism and travel (Dicks 2003;Rutherford 1990).
Traditional identities are not just made in the past: they are infused with current politics, continually evolving and adapting to changes within society (Milner 1994;Taylor 2003).
Tourism can also provide a way of ensuring authenticity and continuity of culture (Picard 1997).
However, is it ethical to objectify people and their culture into a form of spectacle, to be consumed by others?
The subject of the state using ethnic tourism for economic benefits has many problems, most notably in the way different governments embrace tourism and how they approach tourism development (Smith 2003;Sofield 2003).
Tourism and ethnicity can form part of a government device to construct the identity of its citizens and control how the nation is presented to the outside world (Picard & Wood 1997;Wilson & Dissanayake 1996).
This is true for Indonesia where the government has placed an emphasis on regional, not ethnic, differentiation.
The Indonesian government have filtered out what they believe to be suitable to include in the construction of both ethnic and national images (Schiller & Martin-Schillor 1997).
These are then presented differently to local, domestic and international audiences.
Other determinants that may influence such constructions of national identity, such as political issues should also be considered (Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
This summary report is based on research undertaken as part of a M.A programme at the University of Leeds.
The research formed a dissertation that was submitted in September 2007.
This report draws on the study, characterising the complexity of Indonesian identity within the context of a UNESCO World Heritage site.
It comments on the multiple identities that have been created to unite the multiple cultures and languages from across the archipelago under the concept of Indonesia.
This concept of Indonesia is then developed further to market the country for tourism purposes.
Following an overview of the study site, the research methods are outlined.
This is followed by a summary of the key results.
The report concludes with a discussion of some of the key study themes in relation to the research findings and other literature.
Study Site This research study focused on one site in Indonesia.
Both the study site and location were pertinent to the investigation.
Indonesia is an archipelago of over 17,000 islands situated in Southeast Asia.
As a result, it is rich in cultural diversity with hundreds of ethnic groups and languages.
This has created ongoing problems in creating a coherent national identity (Hitchcock, King, & Parnwell 1994;Manning & Van Diermen 2000).
Indonesia is classified by the World Bank as a lower middle income country (World Bank 2010).
Tourism provides an important source of income within Indonesia’s economy.
Political, economic and religious instability have created many challenges in recent years.
Borobudur temple, a UNESCO World Heritage site, was selected as the study area.
It is situated 42 kilometres northwest of Yogyakarta in Central Java, rising out of the palm trees, villages and field of rice and sugar cane.
Dating back to the 8th century, Borobudur is a large Buddhist monument consisting of six square terraces with intricately carved narrative panels, topped by three circular terraces with 72 Buddhas sat in individual latticed stupas (Boccardi, Brroks, & Gurang 2006;Mus & Mac Donald 1998).
The awarding of UNESCO World Heritage site status in 1974 has resulted in the site becoming an archaeological park with local people becoming displaced during extensive conservation efforts.
The site continues to be developed as a tourist attraction for both domestic and international tourists.
In addition, encouraging local community involvement in the development process continues to be a source of conflict between the provincial Central Javanese Government, UNESCO and the local communities (Black & Wall 2001).
Borobudur still carries religious connotations especially for those within the Buddhist community.
The Buddhist Waisak (marking the birth, enlightenment and passing of Buddha) is still celebrated on site every May (Taman Wisata 2007;Turner 1986).
Furthermore, many local residents also incorporate aspects of ancestor worship and animism as part of their religious beliefs.
MethodsInterviews were conducted on site with three types of participants: domestic tourists, international tourists and local people.
Domestic tourists are defined as Indonesians who do not live in the local Yogyakarta area, but live in other Indonesian provinces.
International tourists have been defined as tourists who are not Indonesian citizens and do not reside in Indonesia.
Local people are defined as anyone living within the temple complex or Yogyakarta area.
The interviews were not formally structured, however, a set of open-ended questions were prepared by the researcher prior to conducting the study.
In addition, working papers, reports, conference papers, journal articles and other publications were searched for relevant literature to assist in the interpretation of data.
Further information of the research methodology can be found in Steels ( 2007).
ResultsThe findings presented here provide an overview of the results obtained from the interviews carried out at Borobudur temple.
The designation as a World Heritage site has brought both positive and negative experiences to all those who use the site.
Much could be written about the archaeological site itself.
It is clear that the landscaped areas stand in place of demolished villages, whilst there appears to be a clash in catering towards the different users of the site.
It can at times resemble both an archaeological site and theme park.
Furthermore, the manipulation of culture and the archaeological site for touristic purposes can be seen throughout the temple complex.
Local population Local participants described the difficulty in trying to make a living through the selling of goods to tourists.
They described how economic, political and religious instability can affect their livelihood through decreasing numbers in tourists.
Some participants felt angered and frustrated with both the government and those responsible for causing much of the religious tension.
They felt that there was too much negative media attention (such as the continued coverage of the Bali bombings) and not enough being done to promote tourism.
On the whole, local participants perceived that it was better to have some tourists than none at all.
The relocation of many locals to new homes away from the temple site has resulted in the loss of space to sell their goods.
Restricted entrance to the site has resulted in difficulties for local vendors to sell food, drinks and souvenirs unless a booth is rented and paid for.
This has resulted in many vendors to approach tourists directly in the car park to save on rental costs.
One participant described how the security guards often turn a blind eye to the selling of goods through the metal fencing that surrounds the site.
It was unknown if the guards received some sort of payment for this service.
International tourists Participants in this group provided a mixed response to their overall experience of the site.
Several participants felt intimidated and overwhelmed by what they felt were the aggressive selling of goods upon arrival at the site.
In addition, several participants thought this detracted from the overall experience of the site and suggested that the experience would be more authentic, less stressful and more enjoyable if the vendors and market were removed:“It’s such a shame that they have that awful market at the front of the temple.
It really is an eyesore
and I don’t think it adds to the overall temple vision.”
This was reiterated by another participant:“I think the place would be more authentic without all those people hassling you at the beginning.
Why don’t they find somewhere else to sell their souvenirs?
It really is stressful, especially when you feel like you’re being badgered into buying yet another tablecloth.”
Those who had visited other UNESCO World Heritage sites were more likely to feel indifferent about the experience being ‘authentic’.
As one participant indicated:“Is this an authentic experience?
I don’t really care if it is or isn’t.
It’s just an amazing place to visit…” During the fieldwork period, a large group of monks from Thailand were touring the site in much the same way as other tourists and having their photograph taken next to the stupas.
Thus, adding a further layer of complexity to the site’s identity.
Domestic tourists Domestic tourists make up the majority of tourists that visit the site.
Their visits are short compared to those of international tourists.
Furthermore, all domestic tourists that took part in the study were part of some form of tour group.
Some participants perceived travelling around heritage sites as a way of showcasing their wealth.
In particular, travelling with a tour group was viewed as proof of having a disposable income.
One participant commented:“I don’t really see it [Borobudur] as being part of my own heritage, maybe Indonesian history.
I only know about it from history books and I saw a small version in Taman Mini.
My friends will be really impressed when I show them photos from my trip…” Discussion Development prospects for countries that have an ethnically diverse society, such as Indonesia, often lie in tourism.
One of the problems faced by the Indonesian government is the ongoing promotion of a national identity under the slogan ‘Unity in diversity’.
The promotion of Indonesia as a tourist site results in a situation where the government shapes and controls the tourist encounter (Adams 2003;Picard & Wood 1997).
As a result, culture can become a political weapon when the dominant role of the state is threatened.
Yet, culture can also provide a source for the revival of selected traditions as a way of unifying a group or several groups of people.
The development and re-use of historic public places not only reconstructs the past but also part of the present economy (Nuriyanti 1999).
The Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) was created in 1989 to undertake the task of promoting Indonesian and Indonesian products both internationally and domestically (Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism 2007;Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
In order to increase the demand for international and domestic tourists, several promotional campaigns were launched with a destination-specific promotional plan pursued by the government in their 1994-1998 development plan (Crystal 1989;Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
The problem with this approach was the creation of multiple Indonesian identities at both the global and local level.
For international tourists, Indonesia is marketed as an exotic holiday location compared to the educational ‘visit your heritage’ marketing approach is used for domestic tourists.
Problems arise when a third party is involved in this process.
For Borobudur temple, UNESCO is involved not only in the marketing but also in the management and conservation of the site.
Designated as a cultural rather than religious site by the Indonesian government (Nuriyanti 1999), the conservation of a World Heritage site is a responsibility shared between the international, national and local communities.
However, each stakeholder has different agendas which may result in conflict with the other parties involved.
This was clearly visible during the study period through both fieldwork and the literature (see (Black & Wall 2001;Harrison & Hitchcock 2005).
In particular, the plans to further develop the park and build a large shopping mall in one area at the time of study were under heavy debate.
This illustrates the conflicting views of the different actors involved in the park’s development.
For UNESCO, a shopping mall would not contribute to the site’s archaeological experience and in some ways detract from the cultural heritage of the park.
However, the local governments felt that a shopping mall would attract more tourists to the area.
It became clear during this research study that the local people have not been respected or represented throughout the past and present conservation and development process.
The values that local people attach to this site are different than those attributed by government officials, conservationists and historians (Wall & Black 2004).
This does not mean that values by local people are any less important than others.
It is important to remember that Borobudur is not only a source of income to the state and provincial governments, but also provides income to the local people both in the immediate area and those in the city of Yogyakarta close by.
It can no longer be assumed that Borobudur as a World Heritage site has enabled benefits to be distributed amongst all parties involved, particularly amongst the local population.
The results suggest that it is possible that local people may not have benefited at all since the implementation of turning the temple into an archaeological park.
This is in part due to the top-down approaches to the conservation, development and planning of the park.
Even though local involvement and participation in the decision making process of site development is encouraged; the results from interviewing local people suggest that little effort has been done by other stakeholders to involve the local population at Borobudur temple.
This was also found in Black and Wall ( 2001) study which looked at global-local relationships in the planning process across several UNESCO World Heritage sites.
Their recommendations for better dialogue between government officials and planners with the local population are applicable here.
However, changes in attitudes by all actors involved will be necessary before tangible results can be seen.
Local residents must be seen as having something positive to offer, not only through their historical and cultural ties to the site, but also as caretakers and conservationists (Picard 1996;Wall & Black 2004)There is still a need to resolve the conflicts between different stakeholders in the way Borobudur is interpreted, presented and marketed not only to tourists, but also on a national and international scale.
Furthermore, these images conflict with notions of what it is to be Indonesian.
As a result Indonesia becomes a constantly evolving idea that is open to the influence of ideas from new governments that come into power.
ConclusionIn attempting to explore how Borobudur fits into the construct of Indonesian identity, it was found that Indonesia itself is a construction with several identities being played out simultaneously at the global and local level.
Borobudur itself has become assimilated and utilised into the part of Indonesian identity that has been carefully constructed by the state, other government stakeholders and UNESCO.
Thus, continuing the evolutionary process in order to meet the ongoing needs of creating both national Indonesian and marketing identities.
Tourism has played an important role within Indonesia’s economic development.
It provides a source of income to both the state and the local communities that live around Borobudur temple.
However, the top-down process of conservation and development has put the livelihoods of local people are at risk.
Engagement and collaboration between the different stakeholders involved in the park’s management and the local population is needed to address some of the issues that have arisen from the site’s development.