Tower House Castles of Medieval Europe Tower of Hallbar, South Lanarkshire, Scotland.
Photo by User:Supergolden from Wikimedia Commons Castles in Europe have gone through several stages of evolution.
The tower house is one type of castle built during the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The occupants of these buildings called them castles and they are considered a variety of castle within the genre.
There were political and economic motives for building these unique structures.
Of the surviving medieval tower houses, a couple of them have wall paintings, an extraordinarily exceptional feature that make them special.
Tower Houses in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland The motte and bailey castle was introduced in England after the Norman Conquest.
The reign of William the Conqueror was subject to revolts and sieges.
William began a royal program of castle building for defensive purposes and to house garrisons and supplies.
These were later replaced by castles made of stone with square tower keeps.
Along with the king, greater barons built castles too.
They served three purposes.
Secondly they served a defensive purpose.
In particular, barons were encouraged to build castles creating a deliberate defensive scheme along the borders of Scotland and Wales.
Photo by Joyen69 from Wikimedia Commons In the later Middle Ages, feudal obligations became obsolete.
Consequently, more mercenary soldiers were used.
Castles in England were less important during what later came to be known as the Wars of the Roses when warfare changed to pitched battles in open fields rather than sieges.
This was a time of ambition and social emulation.
They began to build semi-fortified manor houses with square tower keeps, crenellations and a gatehouse.
A tower house as one’s home was a symbol of status, power and rank, denoting the owner could look after himself and protect his valuable possessions.
Tower houses began to be built in cities, along the coast and in the Marches and Borders.
They were never conceived as a means for planned defense and if there were more in some areas than in others, it was only because the dangers were more apparent in those areas.
Stokesay Castle in Shropshire While appearing to be similar to the tower-keeps of castles dating from the twelfth century, it differed in several ways.
There was no forebuilding, it was entered from ground level, and it was more lightly built and for the most part not attached to a larger fortified area.
It was designed to create security and make entry as difficult as possible.
Tower houses were notably plain, commonly rectangular and three stories, with some having four stories.
The ground floor was typically used for storage and sometimes had a separate entrance.
The first floor was usually a hall with a fireplace and private chambers would be on the upper floors.
There would sometimes be a fireplace on the upper levels too with the chimneys enclosed within the wall.
A winding staircase would be built into the thickness of the wall or would be in a projecting corner tower.
There is scarce evidence for a kitchen or other rooms for storage and preparation of food.
The Great Hall and fireplace of Craigmillar Castle (Photo by the author)The top level was customarily battlemented with a wall-walk.
Sometimes two of the four sides would be gabled.
There were many differences in the architecture of these towers with regional variations of design between Scotland, the Borders and the rest of England.
In England the towers were generally annexed to a hall.
A northern tower was usually a stand-alone edifice while a southern tower would be connected to the hall.
The urban tower house was a rarity in England.
We know of Baynard’s Castle in London which lasted into the thirteenth century when the site was given to the Dominicans.
There is evidence of a handful of other tower houses in London mentioned in chronicles and in the requests for licenses to crenellate.
King Richard II is known to have built a tower at the corner of his private palace at Westminster.
There is evidence of other urban towers in Lincoln and Winchester.
Tower houses in the south near the coast were probably intended to give protection from seaborne raiders and pirates.
These towers gave short-term protection against a small force who purpose was to seize booty rather than territory.
Tower houses were a far more numerous and common feature in northern England and the borders where security was an issue.
Some noted examples of tower houses that can still be seen in England include: Sizergh in Cumbria, Arnside Tower in Cumbria, Piel Tower House on the Furness Peninsula, Halloughton in Nottingham, Stokesay Castle in Shropshire, Lympne Castle in Kent, Godlingston Manor in Dorset, Pengersick Castle in Cornwall and Kyme in Lincolnshire just to name a few.
The best surviving tower house of lowland England is Longthorpe Tower in Peterborough, one of the tower houses with an exceptional feature.
Longthorpe is a three story tower that was added to an older house and built between 1290 and 1300 by the Thorpe family, who went from peasants to knights in just three generations.
The family bought their freedom during the reign of King John.
By 1260 they were knights and had the resources to build a manor at Longthorpe along with a chapel.
Around 1300, the tower was added to the manor as a status symbol.
Photo from geography.org.uk by Julian Dowse The most notable feature of Longthorpe Tower are the remarkable and rare wall paintings on the first floor that date from 1330-1350.
It was up to local families such as the Percys, the Nevilles and the Dacres to justify their jurisdictional powers and they built many tower houses for protection against raiders.
They were larger and had a higher degree of elaboration.
Also some of the houses had, at the corners, corbelled bartizans which were favored by the French.
The men who built these homes had substantial wealth and there was greater attention to comfort with more fireplaces and latrines.
Some surviving tower houses in Scotland include Hallbar in South Lanarkshire, and Craigievar Castle, Castle Fraser and Crathes Castle, all in Aberdeenshire.
One of the finest examples of a medieval Scottish tower house is Craigmillar Castle in Edinburgh, built by the wealth Preston family.
Ruins of Craigmillar Castle (Photo by the author)Tower houses exist but are notably rare in Wales and the March.
However, the Irish enthusiastically adopted the practice of building castles and tower houses.
They were built by the Anglo-Irish as well as Gaelic families during the years 1400 to 1650.
Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Ireland The majority of the castles in Ireland are tower houses.
The idea for them could also have been imported from England, Scotland or the Continent.
Smaller lordships were created along with greater wealth and the proliferation of tower house construction.
Thoor Ballylee Tower House in Co. Galway, Ireland.
The majority of these buildings were rectangular, nearly square and had tall walls.
One would enter the lobby of the tower and on one side there might be a small porter’s station and on the other a spiral staircase to the upper levels.
Some Irish tower houses had a straight flight of stone steps within the thickness of a side wall instead of a spiral.
The chambers above would contain deep wall cupboards and fireplaces and narrow slit windows.
The spiral staircase would end at the parapet which consisted of a wall-walk with some crenelation.
After the Tudor conquest of Ireland and especially after Cromwell and the New Model Army crushed opposition in Ireland, the humble tower house became obsolete.
Some examples of tower houses in Ireland that still exist are Kinlough Castle in Co. Galway, Dunguire Castle in Co. Galway, Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Bourchiers’ Castle in Co. Tower Houses in France, Italy and Central Europe Tower houses were exceedingly popular across other parts of Europe as well, especially in northern and central Italy where by the end of the twelfth century, feuds between ruling families often turned deadly.
Families ruling different sections of Italian cities started to erect towers meant to be safe havens when the need arose.
In the Tuscan town of San Gimignano, known as the “City of Beautiful Towers”, the ruling families built seventy two towers.
Today, fourteen of them survive, the tallest being “Torre Grossa” which is 54 meters (177 feet) high and dates from 1298.
In fact, when erecting their towers, the British and Scottish nobles drew some inspiration from the French towers as mentioned above.
Tower houses in France were more fortified than those in England because hostilities were common due to international conflicts such as the Hundred Years War and to internal feuds.
The rectangular, three-storied tower house at Rosieres has a roof covered parapet and corner bartizans and the more slender but taller tower house of Coraboeuf was built before 1450 and has a ground floor entrance and bartizans.
One such example is the thirteenth century “Maison du Sénéchal” in the fortified village at the base of the royal Château de Najac, Aveyron in Midi-Pyrenees.
There are a few surviving examples of tower houses in Central Europe but one of the best preserved is the ducal tower at Siedlecin in Lower Silesia, Poland.
It dates from 1315/1316 and is representative of a medieval seat built for both residential and defensive purposes near the River Bóbr crossing by Duke Henryk I of Jawor (1292-96/1346).
Ducal tower at Siedlecin, the Lower Silesia, Poland.
The most siginificant alteration since the fourteenth century is the addition of a roof in the sixteenth century.
Adjacent to the tower is a manor house which also dates from this period.
The tower has a basement with three stories of living rooms above, remarkably intact.
Ducal Tower of Siedlecin (Photo courtesy of rimlightstudio, the tower’s finest interior space is that of the former Great Hall on the second floor.
Like Longthorpe Tower in England, the south wall has a remarkable set of murals commissioned by Duke Henryk.
Today the ducal tower of Siedlecin is the only place in the world where Lancelot paintings have been preserved in situ.
Ducal Tower of Siedlecin Official Website So these wonderful tower houses are a testament to life during medieval times.
They combine political and social as well as artistic history all in one.
Further reading: “The Medieval Castle in England and Wales: A social and political history: by N.J.G. Pounds, “Great Medieval Houses of England and Wales, 1300-1500: Volume I, Northern England” by Anthony Emery, “Frowning Ruins: The Tower Houses of Medieval Ireland”, article written for “History Ireland” by Colm Donnelly, “A Traveller’s History of Italy” by Valerio Lintner
