roughly 2,500) in the county of East Sussex, England.
Dating from the 10th century a.d.
it is a quaint place with relatively little to see, but due to its location on the main railway line from London to Hastings and the corresponding main road (A21), it represents a good potential base to discover the picturesque local countryside, sights, towns and villages nearby.
The famous cricket brand Gray Nicolls (the Nicolls part) was founded in Robertsbridge, and operates from its original location on station road to this day, making (among other things) handmade cricket bats.
Get in The nearest major airport is London Gatwick, roughly an hour and a half away by road or rail.
By Car The Main Road (A21) running north to south between London (M25) and Hastings runs parallel to the village.
It takes roughly an hour and a half to get into central London by car from Robertsbridge, traffic permitting.
By Bus Rural bus services connect the village directly with other local settlements and the closest towns.
However, due to its location on the main railway line, it is advisable to travel by train if your destination is Hastings, Battle or Tunbridge Wells as this is much quicker and more direct.
(Timetables vary, and are displayed at the bus stops)Get around Robertsbridge is a great place for country walks, offering many public footpaths and bridleways in the immediate surrounding countryside.
SeeBodiam Castle, just a few kilometres away.
It is located on station road, close to the village centre.
Battle abbey in Battle, a nearby small historic town, famed for the location of the The 1066 battle of Hastings, whereby William the Conqueror took control of England and changed the course of history forever.
Robertsbridge Cistercian abbey, unfortunately little remains of this historic site, though some ruins are still visible and can be easily reached on a walk or short drive from the village on the other (eastern) side of the A21 road.
DoBonfire night, Held annually around the 5th of November, this celebration attracts people from miles around and is by far the biggest event of the year for the village.
EatApart from its 3 pubs offering hearty traditional meals, Robertsbridge also has a good Indian Restaurant: New Spice 13 High St, Robertsbridge,
TN32 5AEDrinkSeven Stars Inn, High Street, Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5AJ, ☎ 01580 880333, .
editSleepThe George Inn, High Street Robertsbridge East Sussex TN32 5AW, ☎ 01580 880315, .
Single rate 45gbp per night, 80gbp double room including breakfast.
Located just up the road from the station.
