Earlier this month he gave a lecture at Loyola University in New Orleans on “How Castles Work”.
There is a temptation in landscape archaeology to obsess about this field boundary or that trackway or those humps and bumps or this lovely church or those houses.
It’s very easy to forget that the one true end of archaeology is to understand and account for humans in the past.
The first thing I do with my students from Northwestern, when we stand in front of an English landscape, is to get them to look at and describe very carefully (and in very simple terms) what they think they are seeing, before we move on to what it all might mean.
The questions that have most preoccupied me in the past revolve around the transition from medieval to early modern rural landscapes, which one might gloss as about the move from feudal to nascent capitalist forms of agricultural and social organization.
You just presented a lecture about ‘How Castles work’.
What are you finding in your research that tells a different story about the function of castles?
What I and others have argued in the last couple of decades is that the military view of castles is not wrong, but that it is only part of the story.
In my talk ‘How Castles Work’, I’m trying to take this debate to another level.
I’ve been working at Bodiam with teams from Northwestern University and the University of Southampton, in partnership with the National Trust.
Our view is that we need to move beyond the military/social debate and above all see the castle in its local and regional context.
We did a topographical and geophysical survey of the area around the castle and found a landscape of work – traces of iron and/or ceramic production, the mill, millpond and mill leat, the harbour… So the castle and landscape of Bodiam that we are exploring is neither simply an ornamental garden nor simply a defence against the French; it’s a complex multi-period site whose regional context and location is crucial.
Do you have any publications that will be coming out soon where people can read more about your research?
I’m currently working on a new book on castles which I hope will be out in two to three years!
