For the purposes of this report, we define culture through the role of identity: belonging to a distinct ethnic, cultural or sub-cultural group (Kidd 2002).
This report draws on the study, characterising the complexity of Indonesian identity within the context of a UNESCO World Heritage site.
This concept of Indonesia is then developed further to market the country for tourism purposes.
The report concludes with a discussion of some of the key study themes in relation to the research findings and other literature.
Study Site
This research study focused on one site in Indonesia.
Borobudur temple, a UNESCO World Heritage site, was selected as the study area.
The site continues to be developed as a tourist attraction for both domestic and international tourists.
International tourists have been defined as tourists who are not Indonesian citizens and do not reside in Indonesia.
Furthermore, the manipulation of culture and the archaeological site for touristic purposes can be seen throughout the temple complex.
On the whole, local participants perceived that it was better to have some tourists than none at all.
Furthermore, all domestic tourists that took part in the study were part of some form of tour group.
One participant commented:“I don’t really see it [Borobudur] as being part of my own heritage, maybe Indonesian history.
One of the problems faced by the Indonesian government is the ongoing promotion of a national identity under the slogan ‘Unity in diversity’.
As a result, culture can become a political weapon when the dominant role of the state is threatened.
The Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) was created in 1989 to undertake the task of promoting Indonesian and Indonesian products both internationally and domestically (Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism 2007;Tan, Mc Cahon, & Miller 2002).
For Borobudur temple, UNESCO is involved not only in the marketing but also in the management and conservation of the site.
It is important to remember that Borobudur is not only a source of income to the state and provincial governments, but also provides income to the local people both in the immediate area and those in the city of Yogyakarta close by.
The results suggest that it is possible that local people may not have benefited at all since the implementation of turning the temple into an archaeological park.
Local residents must be seen as having something positive to offer, not only through their historical and cultural ties to the site, but also as caretakers and conservationists (Picard 1996;Wall & Black 2004)There is still a need to resolve the conflicts between different stakeholders in the way Borobudur is interpreted, presented and marketed not only to tourists, but also on a national and international scale.
