8th and 9th century Buddhist sculptures Artist: Unknown Country: Indonesia Province: Central Java Date: 8th and 9th century Medium: Stone Provenance: United Nations Educational,Scientific and Cultural Organization IntroductionThe sitting Buddha in the chamber is one of the many Buddhist statues in the Borobudur Temple Compounds.
The Borobudur Temple Compounds were abandoned as a result of the decline of Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms in Java.
Descriptive Analysis The Borobudur Temple Compounds is a large site with many Buddhist statues.
Three fingers are sticking up on one hand.
The only thing that looks like it is not proportional is the ears.
The body of the Buddhist statue has no definition to it.
The stone of the Buddhist statue is in good condition.
Formal and Contextual Analysis This Buddhist statue as well as the entirety of the Borobudur temple compounds was used as a place of worship for Buddhists on pilgrimages.
There are three tiers of the compounds which are meant to symbolize the three stages of Buddhist cosmology (Kamadhatu- world of desire, Rupadhatu- the world of forms, Arupadhatu- the world of formlessness).
This is important in determining the importance of this particular statue which is located right before the top of the temple which represents the world of formlessness or Arupadhatu.
It is the immaterial realm of the spirit, which is said to be free from the limitations of matter and from all thought of matter.”
This definition gives a deeper insight to the context in which the Buddha is displayed.
The statue found at the Borobudur temple compounds mudra is known as the Gesture of Turning the Wheel of Dharma.
The position of the left hand symbolizes the beings of the three capacities, which follow the combined path of method and wisdom.”
The mudra and the placement of the Buddha right before the top which is used to represent the world of formlessness conveys a direct message to the Buddhist on his pilgrimage.
The Buddha’s seated position is a common one and many look similar to this one with its eyes closed.
