Imperial Recovery Under the Macedonian Dynasty
The Macedonian Dynasty saw expansion and the Byzantine Renaissance but also instability due to competition among nobles in the theme system.
Learning Objective Discuss hegemony under the Macedonian Dynasty Key Points Shortly after the extended controversy over the Byzantine Iconoclasm, the Byzantine Empire would recover under the Macedonian Dynasty, starting in 867 CE.
The Macedonian Dynasty saw the Byzantine Renaissance, when the empire recovered and became the most powerful state in the medieval world and culture and art flourished.
The Empire also expanded during this period, conquering Crete, Cyprus, and most of Syria.
However, the Macedonian Dynasty also saw increasing dissatisfaction and competition for land among nobles in the theme system, which weakened the authority of the emperors and led to instability.
TermByzantine Renaissance The time during the Macedonian Dynasty when art, literature, science, and philosophy flourished.
Full Text Shortly after this extended controversy over iconoclasm, which more or less ended (at least in the East) with the regent Theodora reinstituting icon worship in 842 CE, Emperor Basil I founded a new dynasty, the Macedonian Dynasty, in 867 CE.
It was under this dynasty that the Byzantine Empire would recover and become the most powerful state in the medieval world.
This was also a period of cultural and artistic flowering in the Byzantine world.
Emperor Basil IA depiction of Byzantine Emperor Basil I of the Macedonian Dynasty on horseback.
The time of the Macedonian Dynasty's rule over the Byzantine Empire is sometimes called the Byzantine Renaissance or the Macedonian Renaissance.
Byzantine scholars, most notably Leo the Mathematician, read the scientific and philosophical works of the ancient Greeks and expanded upon them.
Artists adopted their naturalistic style and complex techniques from ancient Greek and Roman art and mixed them with Christian themes.
For example, Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas (who ruled from 912 CE-969 CE) pursued an aggressive policy.
The Macedonian period also included events of momentous religious significance.
The conversion of the Bulgarians, Serbs and Rus' to Orthodox Christianity permanently changed the religious map of Europe and still resonates today.
Cyril and Methodius, two Byzantine Greek brothers, contributed significantly to the Christianization of the Slavs and in the process devised the Glagolitic alphabet, ancestor to the Cyrillic script.
They tended to increase taxes on small farmers in order to enrich themselves, thereby causing massive dissatisfaction.
