The fall of Constantinople Dec 23rd 1999 | From the print editionGREEKS still consider Tuesday an unlucky day.
May 29th 1453, was a Tuesday; the day that Constantinople, the place they called—and often still call—the queen of cities, or simply “the city” was overrun by the Ottoman forces that had bombarded its mighty walls for the past 40 days.
In the history of warfare, this was a watershed.
But far more was over than that.
The Byzantine defenders and their Venetian and Genoese allies had noticed portents since the lunar eclipse a week earlier.
An icon of the Virgin Mary slipped from its platform as it was carried through the city; then a thunderstorm halted the procession.
As dusk fell on May 28th, the Emperor Constantine warned his subjects they might have to sacrifice their lives for the faith, family, country and sovereign.
The clergy—bitterly divided by doctrine, as Christianity's 400-year-old east-west schism deepened—put aside their differences to hold an evening service in Saint Sophia, the greatest church of eastern Christendom.
In the small hours next day, the final assault began, with a deafening noise of trumpets, drums and war-cries.
The Genoese ran down to the sea after their commander was wounded; eventually a dozen Greek and Italian ships, laden with terrified refugees, reached the open sea.
The besiegers—the irregular, ill-trained bashi-bazouks and the elite janissaries—poured in.
Later Sultan Mehmet, the impulsive 21-year-old who had flouted all his elders' advice in besieging the best-defended city in Europe, walked into the building and ordered an imam to claim it for the Muslim faith.
Though much misused by the temporal authorities, the patriarchate survived as an institution for administering the Greek and other Orthodox Christian communities in the new multinational empire.
As a strange side-effect of the Muslim conquest, the doctrinal integrity of eastern Christendom was preserved: instead of the compromises with the Vatican that might otherwise have been inevitable, the patriarchate was able to hold to its view on the issues, such as the nature of the Trinity, that had led to so much bitter argument.
One was the slide of the Byzantine empire's power, as the loss of Anatolian lands left it short of revenue and recruits, and thus more dependent on fickle Italian allies; another the flight of Greek scholars (particularly brilliant in Byzantium's final years) to Italy, where they helped to stimulate the Renaissance.
Yet another was the emergent contest in south-eastern Europe between the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires.
The Turks were besieging Vienna in 1683 and repeatedly at war with Russia or Austria in the 130 years thereafter.
They held southern Greece until 1832, today's Bulgaria, Romania, Bosnia and nominally Serbia until 1878, the lands south of these down to liberated Greece until 1913.
But a part of Europe?
Old enmities were resharpened by the Turkish invasion of northern Cyprus in 1974.
If the European Union still hesitates, despite Turkey's decades inside NATO, about its wish for EU membership too, the real reasons lie centuries deep; not least in 1453.
