One of these was the unification of Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt sometime in the third millennium B.C.
With the unification of the "Two Lands" by the legendary, if not mythical, King Menes, the glorious Pharaonic Age began.
They were the first to build in stone and to fashion the arch in stone and brick.
The legacy of ancient Egypt is written in stone across the face of the country from the pyramids of Upper Egypt to the rock tombs in the Valley of the Kings to the Old Kingdom temples of Luxor and Karnak to the Ptolemaic temples of Edfu and Dendera and to the Roman temple to Isis on Philae Island.
ANCIENT EGYPTThe Predynastic Period and the First and Second Dynasties, 6000-2686 B.C.During this period, when people first began to settle along the banks of the Nile (Nahr an Nil) and to evolve from hunters and gatherers to settled, subsistence agriculturalists, Egypt developed the written language, religion, and institutions that made it the world's first organized society.
Each July, the level of the Nile began to rise, and by the end of August, the flood reached its full height.
Thus, rebirth was seen as a natural sequence to death.
The chief god of the Delta was Horus, and that of Upper Egypt was Seth.
According to tradition, King Menes of Upper Egypt united the two kingdoms and established his capital at Memphis, then known as the "White Walls. "
The Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and Second Intermediate Period, 2686 to 1552 B.C.Historians have given the name "kingdom" to those periods in Egyptian history when the central government was strong, the country was unified, and there was an orderly succession of pharaohs.
The kings would have been discredited by the famine, because pharaonic power rested in part on the belief that the king controlled the Nile flood.
The kings of the Twelfth Dynasty restored central government control and a single strong kingship in the period known as the Middle Kingdom.
Pyramid Building in the Old and Middle Kingdoms With the Third Dynasty, Egypt entered into the five centuries of high culture known as the Pyramid Age.
His son and successor, Kheops, built the Great Pyramid at Giza (Al Jizah); this, with its two companions on the same site, was considered one of the wonders of the ancient world.
The Egyptian belief that life would continue after death in a form similar to that experienced on earth was an important element in the development of art and architecture that was not present in other cultures.
Thus, in Egypt, a dwelling place was provided for the dead in the form of a pyramid or a rock tomb.
Upper Egypt was governed from Thebes.
Art and Architecture in the New Kingdom As historian Cyril Aldred has said, the civilization of the New Kingdom seems the most golden of all the epochs of Egyptian history, perhaps because so much of its wealth remains.
One of the greatest temples still standing is that of Pharaoh Amenophis III at Thebes.
The Cult of the Sun God and Akhenaten's Monotheism During the New Kingdom, the cult of the sun god Ra became increasingly important until it evolved into the uncompromising monotheism of Pharaoh Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV, 1364-1347 B.C.).
Other gods were abolished, their images smashed, their names excised, their temples abandoned, and their revenues impounded.
His ideas were abandoned in part because of the economic collapse that ensued at the end of his reign.
The Late Period, 664-323 B.C.
This dynasty, which ruled from 664 to 525 B.C., represented the last great age of pharaonic civilization.
