It was only in November when the news of the colonial independence got to Portugal.
Portuguese troops were sent to Brazil and both countries fought a war that lasted until November 1823.
He then wrote the Brazilian Constitution, which was imposed in 1824 and lasted until 1891, when it was substituted by a Republican constitution.
The movement was defeated by the imperial government Dom Pedro I started governing Brazil in an economic crisis, since his father Dom João had taken all the wealth from Brazilian vaults when he went back to Portugal.
Dom Miguel, however, started taking decisions to favor himself and his daughter, which initiated a conflict with Dom Pedro I. Brazilians weren’t pleased with the interest of Dom Pedro I in Portugal, which sometimes made him forget Brazil and focus only on the interests of the European country.
These reasons plus the political instability that marked the First Reign resulted in the abdication of the emperor in favor of his son, Dom Pedro II who was then five years old, in 1831.
Regency Period (1831 – 1840)Since a five-year-old child could not govern a nation, from 1831 to 1840 Brazil had representatives to govern in Dom Pedro II’s name, until he reached the majority age of 18.
There were two unique regents from 1834 until 1840.
The “coup” was in fact a declaration from the Senate that Dom Pedro II was already responsible enough to govern the country, and it's believed that it was made to contain the conflicts during the Regency Period.
The two parties took turns as the majority of the chamber during the second empire.
In 1885, it was established the Lei dos Sexagenários, or Sexagenarians Law, which set slaves who were 60 years old “free” - they would still have to work for their former owners for three years.
The Contribution of the Paraguayan War It was during Dom Pedro II government that Brazil got involved in the Paraguayan War, a conflict between Brazilians, Argentines, and Uruguayans against Paraguay.
The Brazilian army which, until before the war, had no real relevance in the national panorama, had to count with black and indigenous people to win the war.
Brazilian Coffee
It was during the second reign that coffee started having a major play in the economic relations of Brazil with the international market.
It was in the Southeast region, however, that it became economically important to the country, when it started to be planted in Rio de Janeiro, spreading through the region and getting to São Paulo's cities.
Then, when the vulcanization process was invented, it was time for rubber to be exported from the cities in the North of Brazil.
Brazilian rubber's cycle rose when coffee production began to decrease, and only ended in 1912, during the Republic.
International Influence Brazil was one of the few countries at that time that still had a monarchy as a form of government: most of the other countries (especially in South America) had already established their republics, which also contributed to the change in the country.
