(Scribes, Illustrators)•
How It Compares With Other Manuscripts• Eastern Influence on the Design• Illuminations• Symbols of the Evangelists• Monogram Page (Chi-Ro) and Others• Legacy• Other Irish Illuminated Gospel Books
Further Resources• Making of Illuminated Manuscripts• History of Illuminated Manuscripts Medieval Book Painting Series• Medieval Manuscript Illumination (c.1000-1500)• Romanesque Illuminated Manuscripts (c.1000-1150)• Gothic Illuminated Manuscripts (c.1150-1350)• International Gothic Illuminations (c.1375-1450)For more about Christianity and the arts, see: Christian Art (c.150-2000).
When was the Book of Kells written, where was it written, and who was the author of the manuscript?
Origins and History of the Book of Kells The greatest achievement of Irish medieval art, the Book of Kells, was formerly held to be earlier than the Lindisfarne Gospels (which are dated approximately from 700 CE) but is now generally assigned to the late eighth or early ninth century.
It can only have been made in one of two places: Iona or Kells.
It seems probable, though, that due to its resemblances to the Lindisfarne Gospels it was at least begun at Iona (a traditional centre of holy learning and illumination, from where Saint Columba launched his mission to Christianize Scotland and where he was later buried), the base from which Lindisfarne had been colonized about the year 635.
Finally in 849 all were brought back to Kells, the great manuscript probably with them.
And as it is hardly probable that such a work should have been begun during the troubled years between 804 and 849 (and since most of its decorative art points to a date within the eighth century)
it is reasonable to assume that an important part of it had been produced in the scriptorium of Iona before the Viking raids drove the monks to Meath.
This was supposed to be because, the book was written and illuminated during the time of Saint Columba (Saint Columcille) (c.521-97), perhaps even by Columba himself.
However, when it is said that the Book of Kells may have been written by Columba it is not meant that he was also the artist from whose pen the elaborate ornamentation of the volume proceeded.
How the Book of Kells Compares With Other Manuscripts The script employed in the Book of Kells is the beautiful round uncial of all the best Irish manuscripts.
The scale of the Book of Kells is different from that of the Book of Durrow, and the mood of its expression is vastly different: the calm, meticulous distinction of the earlier book gives way to a flamboyant, magnificent exuberance; there is nothing of that constrained perfection of order and organization - inherited from the Cathach of Saint Columba (c.610-20) - which mark both the Book of Durrow and the Lindisfarne Gospels.
Each of the Gospels was prefaced with three pages of full-length decoration - a depiction of the Evangelists' symbol, a portrait of the Evangelist himself, and an Initial Page.
In addition, there were extra pages of decoration at two key passages in the text, the incarnation of Christ and the Crucifixion.
Illuminations in the Book of Kells For all the wealth and variety Irish manuscript illumination has to offer, it is the Book of Kells that is generally recognized as the supreme achievement in this field.
In most other manuscripts, the Monogram Page provides the sole decoration at this point but, in the Book of Kells, the incarnation passage is commemorated with two other illustrations.
Other Irish Illuminated Gospel Books The Book of Kells is one of a number of illuminated books created by Irish artists in monastries in Ireland, Scotland and England.
