Initially the eastern half of the Roman Empire, also known as Eastern Roman Empire, it survived the 5th century fragmentation and collapse of the Western Roman Empire and continued to thrive, existing for an additional thousand years until it fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
Both Byzantine Empire and Eastern Roman Empire are historiographic terms applied in later centuries; its citizens continued to refer to their empire as the Roman Empire.
Several events from the 4th to 6th centuries mark the transitional period during which the Roman Empire's east and west divided.
Between 324 and 330, Constantine I (r. 306-337) transferred the main capital from Rome to Byzantium, later known as Constantinople (City of Constantine) and Nova Roma (New Rome).
In 590 BC Byzantium was destroyed by the Persians.
From 336 to 323 BC., it was under the control of Alexander the Great.
The name is a modern term and would have been alien to its contemporaries.
The term Byzantine Empire was invented in 1557, about a century after the fall of Constantinople by German historian Hieronymus Wolf, who introduced a system of Byzantine historiography in order to distinguish ancient Roman from Medieval Greek history without drawing attention to their ancient predecessors.
Constantine the Great 324–337 managed to reunite the empire, but having done so almost immediately set about creating a new capital in Anatolia (330) but this time chose Byzantium in Thrace, on the Bosphorus.
However the empire split again on his death, only to be reunited again by Theodosius I (379–395).
Though Byzantium was ruled by Roman law and Roman political institutions, and its official language was Latin, Greek was also widely spoken, and students received education in Greek history, literature and culture.
Justinian I, who took power in 527 and would rule until his death in 565, was the first great ruler of the Byzantine Empire.
During the years of his reign, the empire included most of the land surrounding the Mediterranean Sea, as Justinian’s armies conquered part of the former Western Roman Empire, including North Africa.
Known as Iconoclasm–literally “the smashing of images”– the movement waxed and waned under various rulers, but did not end definitively until 843, when a Church council under Emperor Michael III ruled in favour of the display of religious images.
The fall of Byzantine Empire During the rule of the Palaeologus Emperors, beginning with Michael VIII in 1261, the economy of the once-mighty Byzantine state was crippled, and never regained its former stature.
Emperor Constantine XI died in battle that day, and the decline and fall of the Byzantine Empire was complete.
