Mark Oliphant Biography Mark Oliphant (1901–2000) was considered a great leader in the sciences, one who inspired his students by his own show of zeal for his research and his positive view of life in general.
He was a physicist who helped develop the atom bomb, although he later protested its use and became an ardent humanitarian.
Born and Raised in Australia Oliphant was born Markus Laurence Elwin Oliphant on October 8, 1901, in Adelaide, Australia.
Oliphant's father was a very religious man and he wanted his oldest son to be a priest, but Oliphant had always been more interested in gadgets and science than in religion.
Oliphant was quoted on the Australia Biography website as saying, "I was always fooling about in the shed at the back of the garden with bits of wire and bits of wood, making what my brothers called my 'raggedy, baggedy engines.'
He graduated from high school with good grades before he went on to attend the University of Adelaide.
After a short while Oliphant agreed, and he graduated with a degree in physics.
To pay for his education he took any odd job he could find, working his way through university.
He was so impressed by what Rutherford had to say that he immediately decided that if he could possibly bring it about, he would work for Rutherford one day.
Rutherford worked at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, England, one of the most advanced research facilities in nuclear power at that time.
In 1927 Oliphant won an exhibition prize at Adelaide University, and then was accepted to Cambridge University.
It was this discovery of fusion that led the way to the hydrogen bomb, although Oliphant never wanted nor intended the knowledge to be used in such a way.
It was American scientist Edward Teller who used Oliphant's knowledge to build the atom bomb.
In 1937 Oliphant took a position with the University of Birmingham, where he became a professor of physics.
Former wavelengths had been around 150 centimeters, very widely spread out; but these new ones were only 10 centimeters, which meant that the radar waves could be focused in narrow beams on one specific point to find ships, submarines, and aircraft, as well as cities.
He there met Ernest Lawrence, who taught Oliphant how to build a 60-inch cyclotron.
World War II Brought About Atom Bomb In 1940
two men, Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls, who also worked at the University of Birmingham, theorized that uranium-235 could be used to create an atom bomb.
Because of his efforts, the United States established the Office of Scientific Research and Development.
This office took on the Uranium Committee as one of its projects, and in December of 1941, after Pearl Harbor was attacked by the Japanese, they set up the Manhattan Engineering District to house what would soon be called the Manhattan Project, to research the building of a uranium atom bomb.
After the use of the bomb in 1945 on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, however, he was appalled by the devastation, and argued against its ever being used again.
We had no idea,' he later said, 'that this would one day be applied to make hydrogen bombs.' "
Although he had been sent to press America to build a bomb, no one at the time knew how devastating such a bomb would be, and Oliphant has said he would not have pressed for its creation if he had known.
He did little work on the actual bomb, however, because the idea of it made him anxious.
Instead he spent most of his time at Berkeley with Lawrence trying to refine Uranium 235.
After VE-Day he returned to the University of Birmingham to continue on as professor of physics.
It was while he was there that he first heard how the atom bomb was used and exactly how powerful it was.
He felt justifiably divided about the report.
On the one hand he felt a scientist's excitement that an idea he had helped create had worked, but on the other hand, the stronger side, he had a humane abhorrence at what the bomb had cost in human lives.
Like so many of the scientists who had worked on the project, Oliphant had never expected that the bomb's effects would be so devastating.
From this point on, Oliphant became an extreme critic of nuclear weapons.
He joined the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs to discuss with people all over the world the idea that no one should ever use such a weapon again.
The Economist wrote, "Like many of the scientists who helped to make the atomic bomb, Mark Oliphant expressed dismay when it was used to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Returned to Australia and Knighted Because of his anti-nuclear weapons stance, Oliphant was often left out of scientific experiments involving nuclear power.
The British neglected to ask Oliphant for help when they tested 12 nuclear weapons from 1952 to 1957, even though he was exceptionally qualified to assess the safety of the tests to make certain no one was hurt by them.
Because of the work he did during the war, Oliphant was given a Congressional Medal of Freedom with Gold Palm, but the Australian government vetoed the honor.
Oliphant returned to Australia in 1950.
There he became the first director of the Research School of Physical Sciences at the new Australian National University in Canberra.
Became State Governor of South Australia
He retired from the Australian National University in 1967.
He was then invited to become the state governor of South Australia.
He accepted the honor and held office from 1971 to 1976.
In 1977 he was made a Companion in the Order of Australia.
After witnessing her suffering prior to her death, he became a strong proponent for voluntary euthanasia for debilitating and incurable diseases.
Oliphant died in Canberra on July 14, 2000, at the age of 98.
Many locations have been named after the great scientist, including the Mark Oliphant Conservation Park, the Oliphant building at Australian National University, the Oliphant wing of the Physics Building at the University of Adelaide and the Mark Oliphant Building in Bedford Park, South Australia.
A South Australian High School science competition was also named in his honor.
He will be remembered as the scientist who unwillingly helped to build the atomic bomb, but who stuck by his principles in trying to stop the further development and use of nuclear weapons.
Time International , October 25, 1999; July 31, 2000.
