18 Interesting Facts About The Manhattan Project By Cyber Panthers The Manhattan Project was one of the major successes in the field of nuclear science.
manhattan project Image: comicvine.com1.
Letter to the President Albert Einstein Albert Einstein sent letters to President Roosevelt making him aware about the possibility of nuclear chain reactions in a large mass of uranium, which could lead to the formation of extremely powerful atomic bombs.
Moreover, letter also warned about the probable chance that Germany might be working on the nuclear bomb project, which may rock the planet first!
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org2.
Unrewarded involvement Einstein was not the part of the Manhattan Project, as he did not get the security clearance required for the project from the U.S. Army Intelligence office.
Source: amnh.org3.
Top-secret project Oak Ridge Wise Monkeys Manhattan Project was the top-secret project because U.S. was worried that enemies like Germany and Japan would learn about the nuclear technology and could use it in escalating their nuclear weapons.
Source: american-historama.
Safety measures for employees In order to ensure the safety of employees in the Manhattan Project radiation they used detectors to check the amount of radiation at the lab sites.
Source: manhattanprojectvoices.org5.
Little boy Little boy“Little boy” was the code name given to the bomb made of uranium – 235.
Source: american-historama.
The bomb was detonated over Nagasaki and left the 44% of the city destroyed.
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org7.
Price paid for the project Aerial view of the Manhattan project plant The total cost of the project was equal to less than nine days of wartime spending.
Building plants and producing the fissionable materials fetched more than 90% of the total expenditure and less than 10% was for development and production of the weapons.
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org8.
Security Check – ups Lie detector test
The work force employed for the project was so huge that a special intelligence corps was set up to handle the security issues.
Source: american-historama.
Moles in the Dark Manhattan Project employees As per the 1945 “Life” article before the bombings, not more than a few dozen men in the whole nation knew the full meaning of the Manhattan Project and only a thousand others were aware that work on atoms was involved.
The magazine penned that more than 100,000 others employed with the project “worked like moles in the dark.”
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org10.
Punishments include rigorous prison of long 10 years or a $10,000 fine.
Source: wikipedia, image: imgur.com11.
Britain supplied crucial expertise, which proved to be of great help in the completion of project.
Soon Frisch–Peierls memorandum provoked Britain to make its own project.
Earlier, Britain had a more advanced project but as the United States entered the war, it overshadowed Britain’s project.
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org13.
As a result, Einstein wrote two more letters to the President.
It was result of Einstein’s information that work on the nuclear weapons started in America and one of the successful results was the Manhattan project.
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org14.
In addition, the testing sites were Alamogordo and New Mexico.
After testing bombs successfully, Hiroshima and Nagasaki became its first and last victims.
Source: encyclopedia.com, image: wikimedia.org15.
Thin man vs. Little Boy Thin Man plutonium gun bomb casings Thin man was a plutonium gun type fission weapon but was unsuccessful and little boy was a development to it or we can say that little boy was its successful version and was formed using uranium instead of plutonium.
Bomb was named little boy because of its association with the thin man.
The Gadget and Fat Man
The gadget The Gadget was a test version of the implosion system, used in the” Fat Man” another successful example of the development of nuclear science.
As the name suggests this bomb was more robust than “Little Boy” and made from plutonium.
The atomic test Trinity Site Obelisk National Historic Landmark Complicated implosion styled weapon made it compulsory to conduct a test.
Source: wikipedia, image: wikimedia.org
