Rudolf Ernst Peierls Born: 5 June 1907 in Berlin, Germany Died: 19 September 1995 in Oakenholt, near Oxford, England Rudolf Peierls' parents were Heinrich Peierls and Elizabeth Weigert and he was their only child.
When Rudolf was fourteen years old his mother died of Hodgkin's disease, and his father married Else Hermann (who was not Jewish) soon after.
Peierls wanted to follow a career in engineering but his father doubted that his son had the necessary dexterity and practical skills to excel in this, so he put pressure on Rudolf to enrol in physics courses.
Notice that he still wanted to study experimental physics rather than theoretical physics, but practical subjects were in such high demand at Berlin University that the university authorities prevented students taking them in their first year.
After a year at Berlin, Peierls moved to the Department of Theoretical Physics in Munich University in 1926.
It was Sommerfeld who introduced Peierls to quantum mechanics during these two years and this proved highly significant for Peierls' career.
Peierls' next move was to the Theoretical Physics Department of Leipzig University in 1928, mainly as a result of Sommerfeld leaving Munich for a world tour.
He followed Heisenberg's advice of research topic and began the work which would lead to his first paper Zur Theorie der galvanomagnetischen Effekte (1929).
He was awarded his doctorate from Leipzig in 1929, then in the autumn of that year he was appointed as Pauli's assistant in Zürich.
In the summer of 1930 Peierls went to a conference in Odessa where he met not only with Lev Landau, but also many of his colleagues.
After six months of intense correspondence by letter, Rudolf Peierls travelled to Leningrad again in March 1931, and during his brief stay - much to the dismay of his surprised family - married Genia.
Peierls was awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship and he spent the first half of the year 1932-33 in Rome with Enrico Fermi, and the second half in England where he worked at Cambridge with Paul Dirac and Ralph Fowler.
He spent a highly productive year there, working with Hans Bethe, and began publishing papers on nuclear physics in addition to his continuing work on the electron theory of metals.
His next position was a two year fellowship held at Cambridge, following which, in 1937, he accepted a professorship in mathematical physics at Birmingham University.
The deteriorating political situation in Germany led to Peierls attempting to gain British citizenship in May 1938 and, at the same time, he tried to reject his German citizenship.
Restrictions were lifted in February 1940 when his application for British citizenship was approved.
However, undertaking war work was still difficult and this would prove particularly so when, together with Otto Frisch (an Austrian), he made it known to the British government through the 3-page Frisch-Peierls memorandum that he had the theoretical knowledge to make an atomic bomb from uranium-235 a possibility.
Soon, however, the realisation that it was impossible to prevent the two scientists who had proposed the idea from knowing about it came home to the committee and Peierls and Frisch were invited as members of a technical subcommittee.
He continued to work there despite offers from Oxford, Manchester, London and Cambridge.
During these years, he also worked as a consultant to the British atomic programme at Harwell where Klaus Fuchs, who had worked closely with him on the atomic bomb project, now held a senior position.
The Spectator alleged he spied for the Soviet Union with the codename "perls", but this was totally unfounded [6]:-His contacts with left-wing colleagues, his friendship with people of Communist persuasion, his marriage to a Russian, his close friendship with Klaus Fuchs - all led to his being viewed with a degree of suspicion by many.
His applications for a visa to visit the United States met with long delays.
By now he was feeling that he had been in Birmingham long enough and was looking for a challenge.
However, he did not rush to accept which he did not do until the following year, only taking up the position in 1963.
He worked in Oxford until he retired in 1974, then spent the period between February and May of each of the next three years at the University of Washington.
The list of other places he visited in the years following his retirement is too long to give here.
Peierls received many honours such as election to the Royal Society in 1945, and receiving their Royal Medal in 1959.
He was also awarded the Max Planck Medal (1963), the Enrico Fermi Award (1980), the Matteucci Medal (1982), and the Copley Medal (1986).
For his wartime contributions he was made a Commander of the British Empire in 1946, but the most pleasing honour of all was a Knighthood in 1968 since it gave him an acceptance by the British establishment after many years of unfair suspicion.
In 1997, two years after his death, Selected scientific papers of Sir Rudolf Peierls was published.
An inveterate traveller, he was well acquainted with nearly all the distinguished mathematical and theoretical physicists of his time and worked with many of them; he also had many young friends and research students who achieved distinction.
This valuable book features a selection of 72 of the much larger number of scientific papers and lectures that Peierls contributed to the scientific literature, and includes translations into English of his early work as well as personal comments by the author which modestly evaluate the importance of most of the papers. ...
Peierls was a highly competent, though not a notably creative mathematician; his principal interest was clearly in making calculations which would lead to a deep understanding of physical phenomena, and he was adept at finding approximations which gave trustworthy numerical results.
However, it is remarkable how many of these papers have played a crucial role for the subsequent development of their subjects ...
We end this biography by looking briefly at his two books Surprises in theoretical physics (1979) and More surprises in theoretical physics (1991).
Describing the first, P Roman writes:-This unusual, fascinating, slim volume renders exactly what its distinguished author promises: "to illustrate and to entertain"---and to delight the reader, I would like to add.
It is based on (obviously leisurely) lectures that Sir Rudolf gave in 1977/78, both in the U.S. and in France.
The topics covered are mostly from quantum theory and its applications; statistical physics and even relativity are touched upon.
A first collection of surprises was published in 1979 and is now supplemented by the present work, with topics taken mainly from the long multifaceted experience of the author. ...
this book can be warmly recommended to physics students and to their teachers as a valid auxiliary tool for courses in quantum mechanics, structure of matter and statistical physics.
