Such battles, however, were the exception, for during the Middle Ages warfare was a much more complicated affair that more often than not involved siegecraft.
In fact the medieval siege was a complex, highly choreographed process that ended with a castle assault only when other tactics had failed to force a surrender.
At the same time, specific conventions for conducting a siege were well established.
They had to consider from where in the realm the best archers, skilled carpenters, blacksmiths, sappers, and engineers could be drawn.
Surrender under honorable terms was a common way out of a siege.
When a garrison refused to surrender, the balance of besieging forces would trek to the siege site, set up their encampment, and construct some basic defenses of their own not too far from the castle’s walls.
Alternatively, they might sail a barge to the base of the castle’s outer, or curtain, wall.
The key to an escalade was for the attackers to climb the ladders as quickly as possible, leap onto the battlements, and begin fighting the defenders.
Then they would man the era’s most destructive weapons–siege engines.
The Romans bequeathed two important siege engines to medieval warfare.
The onager’s medieval counterpart, a mangonel, employed a long timber arm or beam held in place by skeins of tightly twisted rope stretched between two sides of the frame.
Mangonels were also on hand in 1216, when France’s Prince Louis besieged mighty Dover Castle, on England’s southeastern coast.
The Romans modified the modest Greek siege engine known as the scorpion into a horrific dart-firing machine called the ballista, which was later used during the Middle Ages.
Used in warfare as early as the sixth century, rams and bores were often pointed and iron-tipped for added effect, and were sometimes shaped, not surprisingly, as rams’ heads.
The other, longer end of the arm would be hauled down and a heavy stone placed in a leather pouch that was attached by two ropes to the beam’s end.
Counterweight trebuchets probably arrived in England when Prince Louis of France besieged Dover Castle during his near-successful invasion of England.
Then the two sides signed a truce in October, and Louis moved most of his troops to London.
England’s Edward I, a master of siegecraft as well as castle building, was particularly fond of the trebuchet and used it and other siege engines against castles in Scotland, Wales, and France in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries.
In 1300 Edward had besieged Caerlaverock Castle.
According to Walter, ‘Caerlaverock was so strong a castle that it feared no siege before the King came there, for it would never have had to surrender, provided that it was well supplied, when the need arose, with men, engines and provisions.’
Edward required all of England’s noblemen who owed knights’ service or held property in his name to assemble at Carlisle, in the northwestern corner of the country.
Finally, the siege engines breached the curtain wall.
If a castle was strong enough to withstand the pounding of siege engines and if the garrison refused to surrender, the commander of the besieging army still had several options.
In late 1215, England’s King John besieged Rochester Castle, which was held by a group of rebellious barons led by William d’Albini.
The king then turned to his miners.
During the late stages of a prolonged siege, attackers would often make use of one last great engine–the siege tower, or belfry.
It was a multipurpose machine that would be rolled to the battlements of a castle so that the men secreted inside could climb onto the walls or operate weapons, such as battering rams and mangonels, from close-range positions of relative safety.
Attackers first had to ensure that the moat or ditch was filled in and the ground relatively smooth.
Windy weather posed problems, and the large, slow-moving belfry was vulnerable to fire from castle siege engines, as well as archers and crossbowmen.
Sappers might dig at the castle foundations from inside the tower.
During the 1224 siege of Bedford Castle, Henry III employed two enormous belfries to tower over the battlements and shelter archers firing at the garrison.
Attackers could then attempt to starve out the garrison.
When a garrison finally gave in, the men often symbolically signaled the besiegers of their intent to surrender.
For example, in 1326 John Felton, constable of Caerphilly Castle in Wales, withstood a four-month siege led by William, lord Zouche, in the name of Queen Isabella.
It was not until the late fourteenth century that cannons were developed to the point that they began to replace timber engines as the preferred siege machine.
By 1415, when Henry V besieged Harfleur, the king’s favored weapon was the cannon, the fire from which devastated the castle’s barbican to the point that the English could then torch the castle and force the French garrison’s surrender.
Like the timber siege engines, in time the castle became obsolete, not just as a weapon in the medieval arsenal but also as a formidable residence.
