It was a style of architecture which was famed for grand arched buildings with sweeping windows.
Many cathedrals in Europe are 'gothic', and Malbork Castle is an example of gothic architecture.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
It was a style of architecture which was famed for grand arched buildings with sweeping windows.
Many cathedrals in Europe are 'gothic', and Malbork Castle is an example of gothic architecture.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
A new technological development - the flying buttress - meant that it was possible to build taller, wider and grander buildings.
These was made possible by the developments above, and ushered in a new age of design, which was dramatically different from the claustrophobic old castles of before.
I've written another page on the characteristics of gothic architecture, if you're keen to find out more.
The vaulted arches are typical of gothic architecture; and the spooky surroundings have been featured in gothic novels and poetry.
Castles as a place of fear and terror: Gothic Castles and the Gothic Novel Dark, secret passageways are a common feature of gothic novels.
Often, these novels were set in the ruins of old castles.
This meant that castles were often used as a setting in gothic novels.
People envisaged castles to be filled with secret passages, terrible old mysteries, and even to be filled with vampires and fearful creatures (see more on Hunyad castle, just below!)
Credit: Joel Kabahit CC-BY-2.0Hunyad Castle - A Fearful Gothic Castle, Hidden In Transylvania Hunyad Castle (variously known as Corvinesti Castle or Corvin Castle, after the family who used to own it) is undoubtedly the spookiest of all gothic castles.
Terribly, the legend goes, they it captors turned on their word.
In common with the gothic castles featured in film and novels, Hunyad is famed for its ghosts.
Malbork is a wonder of the Medieval world which has miraculously survived until today.
The perfect vaulted arches within Malbork Castle are a beautiful example of gothic castles architecture.
