San Felipe served as the location for the Conventions of 1832 and 1833, and the Consultation of 1835 - meetings that led to the Texas Declaration of Independence.
San Felipe was restored after the War for Independence and Texas victory in the at San Jacinto.
Stephen F. Austin State Park -664 acre park is in two sections, historical and recreational.
The historical section is near an old ferry crossing of the Brazos River.
San Felipe de Austin, on the west bank of the Brazos River at the Old San Antonio Road crossing, a site now on Interstate Highway 10 two miles east of Sealy in southeastern Austin County, was founded in 1824 by Stephen F. Austin as the unofficial capital of his colony.
It became the first urban center in the Austin colony, which stretched northward from the Gulf of Mexico as far as the Old San Antonio Road and extended from the Lavaca River in the west to the San Jacinto River in the east.
By October 1823, after briefly considering a location on the lower Colorado River, Austin, with the assistance of the Baron de Bastrop, decided to establish his capital on the Brazos near the settlement at which John Mc Farland operated a ferry.
In 1829 Pilgrim began conducting the first Sunday school in Texas at San Felipe.
Its population in 1835 approached 600, and many more settlers resided nearby within the boundaries of the municipality.
The conventions of 1832 ** and 1833*** were held in the town, and as the site of the Consultation of November 3, 1835****, San Felipe served as the capital of the provisional government until the Convention of 1836 met the following March at Washington-on-the-Brazos.
When the Texas Western Narrow Gauge Railway constructed its Houston-Sealy spur through the vicinity in 1882, the remaining residents of San Felipe moved southward about a half mile to a new town site along the tracks.
But in 1899 the Texas Western, a minor carrier, abandoned its Houston-Sealy line, and by 1890 the population of San Felipe had declined to 177.
Most of the original town site on the banks of Bullinger's Creek now lies within the 4,200-acre Stephen F. Austin State Historical Park, which was dedicated in 1928 and donated to the state by the town of San Felipe in 1940.
Sam Houston, a new leader on the Texas political horizon, attended from Nacogdoches.
Austin was chosen to present the petitions to the government in Mexico town.
Although a few of the delegates met at the scheduled time, the meeting was almost immediately adjourned as the result of military hostilities that had erupted earlier in the month.
Henry Smith was chosen as governor.
Blanche Hoff, San Felipe de Austin: Capital of Austin's Colony (Houston?
Noah Smithwick, The Evolution of a State, or Recollections of Old Texas Days (Austin: Gammel, 1900; rpt., Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983).
