to report on the expediency or inexpediency of petitioning the general government to establish a State government for Texas, independent and separate from Coahuila (roll call vote 36 for, 12 against).
Excepting this disturbance, which was opposed by ninety-nine hundredths of the settlers and which was quieted by their zeal and patriotism, we repeat it: that up to the passage of the law of April 6, 1830, our conduct was orderly and patriotic.
It was mortifying to us, for it blasted all our hopes, and was enough to dishearten all our enterprise.
It closed the door upon a people who have brought with them to Texas those ideals of Republican government in which from birth they had been educated and practiced.
Is it for a moment to be supposed that the European parasites of power, to whom now alone the door of immigration is left open-that those who have been taught from infancy to believe in the natural inequality of mankind; who have been unacquainted with constitutions even in name; who, politically speaking, have never been accustomed to think or legislate for themselves; who reverence the arm of monarchial rule; who pay adulation at the feet of an hereditary nobility and who have contemplated republics only in theory and at a distance---is it, we repeat, to be supposed that immigrants of this description will contribute more to the advancement of liberty and the welfare of the Republic than immigrants from that land of liberal sentiments, that cradle of freedom, that mother of constitutional heroes---the United States of the north?
Your memorialists having, as they trust and respectfully conceive, shown to your honorable bodies that their conduct up to the time of the passage of the law of April 6, 1830, was orderly and patriotic, will now turn your attention to their conduct since that period.
This law was sufficient to goad us on to madness, in as much as it blasted all our hopes and defeated all our calculations; inasmuch as it showed to us that we were to remain scattered, isolated and unhappy tenants of the wilderness of Texas, compelled to gaze upon the resources of a lovely and fertile region undeveloped for want of a population, and cut off front the society of fathers and friends in the United States of the north; to prepare homes and comforts suited to whose age and infirmities many of us had patiently submitted to every species of privation.
Was it in our remaining quiet for more than two years after the passage of the law of the 6th of April?
NO!
Experience shows that native Mexican-, will not settle in it; but should they do so it would not augment the physical force of the nation, for it would only be taking population from one part of the Republic to place them in another.
Our hopes, then, for the development of the resources of Texas are naturally turned to the United States of the north, to a people who have been trained in the school of Republicanism, whose physical constitutions are adapted to the climate and who have been brought up to the cultivation of such articles as will always be the staples of Texas.
Another point of view, in which the law of the 6th of April is objectionable, and has been productive of numberless difficulties, is this: The garrisons with which all parts of Texas have been lately crowded must have grown out of this law and have been sent here to enforce it.
The following report of 16 Oct to the Ayuntamiento of Bexar summarizes the meeting and was an appeal for support of the residents of Bexar to support its goals:Pursuant to a call of the Alcalde of this municipality, a general meeting of the inhabitants of Texas, through delegates, took place in this town on the 1st inst.
All the foregoing I communicate to your body, by order of the convention, hoping that the people of Bexar will approve the measures adopted and proceed to the appointing of a committee in that city, charged with the duty of a correspondence with the committee of this town.
The memorial and the above letter with additional proceedings of the meeting was presented to the Ayuntamiento of Bexar hoping that their fears and doubts about the purpose of the meeting would ease and they would join in the objects of the consultation.
Nor can it be doubted that abuses have been committed by military men in Texas since 1830; nor that they have not been remedied, and that the government of the State has, in several instances, been disregarded and insulted.
As to your communication to the Ayuntamiento in relation to the convention, I believe that it would have been better not to have written it.
There is little probability that we shall soon have a stable and peaceable order of public affairs; and I give it as my deliberate judgment that Texas is lost if she take no measure of her own for her welfare.
I am settling up all my affairs, and in April I will In Texas things present no hopeful aspect, but still when away I shall be glad to be informed how matters go on.
With the feeling that the central government or the government of Coahuila and Texas gave little or no serious consideration to the memorial from the first consultation presented to them, a second convention composed of fifty-six delegates, a majority of whom had served as members of the first convention of 1832 was organized largely by William H. Wharton, president, and Thomas Hastings, secretary.
Stephen F. Austin was for petition for independent statehood, but without drafting a constitution while William H. Wharton, who was elected president instead of Austin for the consultation, was for the latter course.
April 1-13 1833DELEGATESBranch
T. Archer (Columbia)Stephen F. Austin (Austin)Francis A. Bingham Charles Baird (Austin)Gail Borden Jr. (Austin)James Bowie John M. Bradley
Henry S. Brown (Gonzales)Edward Burleson (Mina)Jesse Burnham David G. Burnet (Liberty)George Butler Joseph Bell Chance (Washington)Nestor Clay (San Patricio)John P. Cole (Washington)George W. Davis (Gonzales)Green De Witt (Gonzales)Silas DinsmoreA.
The petition for independent statehood was based on a decree of 7 May 1824 of the Mexican Congress "so soon as Texas shall be in a condition to figure as a state of itself, it shall inform Congress thereof, for its resolution" followed by the precise practical arguments of distance, different interests, dependence on Coahuila, economic potential and others.
The inhabitants of all Texas, met in General Convention, at the Town of San Felipe de Austin, by means of delegates, for the purpose of making known their wants to the government, most respectfully represent, that they desire the separation of Texas from Coahuila; believing such separation indispensable to their mutual happiness and prosperity; and that ultimately, such division would produce the most happy results to the Mexican Republic.
Coahuila being so far distant from the population of Texas, and so widely variant from it in interests, the rights and wants of the people of Texas cannot be properly protected and provided for, under the present organization, admitting the several Departments of the Government of the State to be prompted by the utmost purity of intention, in their efforts for the administration of justice.
However, unfortunately---just at this time, and while they were being told, the Government would put them in possession of their lands,-some of our fellow citizens, without authority, ran off, and concluded in a survey, part of the Cherokee claim or grant; consequently creating, by such an act, a distrustful disposition on the part of those Indians - in conjunction with all those unlawful acts, so repeatedly committed on the poor confiding Indians of Texas, who are thus made to believe that we are actuated by the same spirit as their former oppressors.
Under these Indian circumstances alone, we most respectfully solicit and entreat your most Honorable Body, to consider that as a state, we would be enabled to take such active measures in their behalf, as would convince them, that they could not with impunity be unlawfully or unjustly intruded upon; humbly trusting, that we could do such justice to their wishes in relation to lands, as could not fail to assure them of our friendship and protection; ---besides, enlisting those North American Tribes of Indians among us, in favor of the state and general Government, by securing to them a permanence of situation, and enrolling them as brother-citizens of that confederacy, which they so much respect and regard!
Rights for Independent State under Constitution of 1824.
For the above reasons and many others, which the General Congress will readily conceive, and in view of the decree of the 7th of May, 1824, allowing the people of Texas, so soon as their situation would permit, to appear as a distinct state, to report to Congress for their resolution, ---also, in connection with the 11th section of the Federal Constitution, guaranteeing them a representative in Congress, whatever may be their population; and considering duly, the benefits that would result, both to Texas and to the nation, we entertain no doubts of the favorable reception of this petition.
The inhabitants of Texas, and so forth, ---respectfully represent, that the duties on articles of necessity to the inhabitants, which are not and cannot be manufactured in Texas for several years to come, are so high as to be equivalent to a total prohibition: that many other articles which are prohibited by the Tariff, are of the first necessity to the settlers of Texas.
Dr. James B. Miller of San Felipe, a member of the convention and one of those chosen to present the results of the meeting to the Congress of Mexico informed the Jefe-Politico at San Antonio de Bexar of the detailed proceedings and outcome of the meeting emphasizing:"The convention, after long and mature deliberation on the important subject, decided unanimously that the people of Texas are in the condition prescribed by article two of the constitutive law of May 7, 1824 which sets forth how and under what circumstances their Province may have a State organization separate from and independent of Coahuila; and thereupon they addressed a petition to the General Congress praying for the admission of Texas as one of the States of the Mexican confederation, and to said petition attached the plan of a constitution for the State to be created. "
