James Bowie James Bowie April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836 (aged 39)Nickname Jim Bowie Place of birth Logan County, Kentucky (USA)Place of death the Alamo, San Antonio, Republic of Texas Allegiance United States of America Republic of Texas Service/branch Republic of Texas Militia Years of service 1835, 1836 Rank ColonelUnit Garrison of the Alamo Commands held the Alamo, San Antonio Battles/wars siege of the Alamo James "Jim" Bowie (April 10, 1796 – March 6, 1836) was a nineteenth century American pioneer and soldier who took a prominent part in the Texas Revolution and was killed at the Battle of the Alamo.
Bowie is also known for the style of knife he carried, which came to be known as the "Bowie knife. "
He gained fame in 1827 when he participated in the Sandbar Fight and killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife.
Newspapers printed the story of the fight, and within the next few years Bowie's fame, and that of his knife, spread around the world.
Bowie was often away from home in the early years of his marriage, and spent several months looking for the lost Los Almagres Mine.
They found a permanent home in Opelousas Parish in 1812.
[9] Louisiana was gaining population rapidly, and the brothers wished to take advantage of rising land prices by speculating in land but did not have the capital required to buy large tracts of land.
He would buy smuggled slaves from Lafitte, then bring the slaves directly to a customhouse and inform on himself.
The customs officers would put the slaves up for auction, and Bowie would buy them back.
[9]Bowie and his brother John were involved in a large court case in the late 1820s over their land speculation in Louisiana.
When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803, the country had promised to honor all former land grant claims, and, for the next 20 years, tried to determine who owned what land.
[23] Other members of the groups, who had various reasons for disliking each other, began fighting.
Bowie was shot in the hip; after regaining his feet he drew a large knife, described as a butcher knife, and charged his attacker.
[25]Newspapers picked up the story, which became known as the Sandbar Fight.
[17]There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same kind of knife now known as a Bowie knife.
[28] and many Bowie family members and "most authorities on the Bowie knife tend to believe it was invented by" Bowie's brother Rezin.
[29]After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie successfully used his knife to defend himself, his knife became very popular.
[35] After that he returned to his travels in Louisiana and Mississippi.
[36]Later that year, Bowie was elected a commander of the Texas Rangers.
He convinced 14 or 15 other citizens to apply for land and turn it over to him, giving him 700,000 acres (2,834 km²) of land to speculate with.
At the time, Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $223,000, most of it in land with questionable titles.
[41] The couple built a house in San Antonio, on land de Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission.
[49] In July 1832 Bowie, who was in Natchez, heard that the Mexican commander of Nacogdoches, Jose de las Piedras, had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms.
[17] Bowie returned to Texas and on August 2, 1832 joined a group of other Texans in marching into Nacogdoches to "present their demands" to Piedras.
[50]Bowie returned to land speculation in Texas in 1834 after the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in the state.
[17]Stephen F. Austin returned to Texas in September 1835 and was soon elected the commander of the volunteer army in Texas.
[52]The Alamo Houston received word that Mexican general Santa Anna was coming to San Antonio with a large force of soldiers.
[54]They were joined in the next few weeks by William Travis, with 30 men, and Davy Crockett, with 12 additional men.
[58] Santa Anna and his army reached the outskirts of San Antonio de Bexar several days later,[59] and the army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24.
Bowie asked that his cot be carried over the line, and Crockett and several others assisted him in joining the others.
After the conclusion of the battle, Santa Anna ordered the alcade of San Antonio, Francisco Antonio Ruiz, to confirm the identities of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
