AegyptusHere are some facts about the roman province of Egypt:
Aegyptus The Roman province of Egypt (Aegyptus) was established in 30 BC.
The capital of Egypt was Alexandria.
As per the Greek mythology, the name Aegyptus is derived from the name of an ancient Greek ruler known as Aegyptus.
Ancient Egyptian Aegyptus was a roman province of Egypt named after him.
The employment of a governor brought an end to the political influence in Egypt.
The governor was at the top of the hierarchy, followed by the administration of justice.
Roman law governed the business matters.
Romans derived huge sums of revenue from Egypt.
For smooth functioning of administration, Egypt was divided into small provinces along with establishment of town councils.
In 3rd century, the town councils and its officials were given administrative responsibility.
The Greeks had the council of elders, independent of the town council.
The Romans developed a complex tax system in Egypt.
Taxes were levied on land and could be paid in cash or kind.
The officials collected small taxes in cash.
In Egypt, a person was allowed to own property and it was necessary for the owner of a property to perform public service.
Poll tax was introduced by the Romans.
The system of social hierarchy was introduced by Romans whereby Romans and Greek were at the top, followed by the metropolite and lastly the people staying in villages.
In Egypt people could apply for citizenship either by joining the army or being a part of the legions.
To become a citizen of Alexandria, a person was required to show that his parents were its citizens.
Egypt was an essential source of food for the Romans.
During the 1st and 2nd century, trading activity in the Roman province flourished.
Goods were exchanged for coins.
This revolution resulted in the gradual decline of Egypt's economy.
The Roman province (Ancient Egypt Aegyptus) was a center for Christianity.
It is also the place where Coptic Christian sect is believed to have originated.
Not much is known about how exactly Christianity was introduced in Egypt.
Alexandria was the biggest center of Christianity.
After the partition of the Roman Empire in two parts, Egypt was a part of the Byzantine Empire and Constantinople was its new capital.
However, Alexandria remained the religious and economic center.
It also continued to be the main source of food supply for the Romans.
-Facts for kids about ancient Egyptian Afgyptus-Roman province
Aegyptus of Ancient Egypt
