Following introductions, Chairman Conte asked for a motion on the meeting minutes of 2 June 2012.
A motion to approve the minutes was made by Dr. Arnett, with a second by Dr. Walker.
Chairman Conte called upon Mr. Geiger for the Archives and History report.
Staff have also been working on development grants, printing a newsletter, and working on the 2013 calendar, which will focus on significant people of the Civil War.
Mr. Armstrong asked about the development grants.
Mr. Armstrong noted that Courthouse Facilities was doing a survey of the condition of West Virginia courthouses and asked if SHPO was involved.
She noted that the Dr. W. W. Monroe House, Wood County, had been listed in the National Register on August 1, 2012.
1852, was presented by Sandra Scaffidi.
Mr. Armstrong asked if the brick line on the wall in the office/den was original.
Ms. Frye asked if the interior doors were grained and was informed they were not.
Spencer Cemetery, Marshall County, nominated under Criterion C, Art, and Criterion Consideration D, Cemeteries, with period of significance being 1912, was presented by Erin Riebe.
Chairman Conte, Ms. Frye, and Dr. Arnett noted that the nomination was unusual.
Mr. Armstrong asked about the origin of the stump and was informed by Ms. Riebe that it probably had been ordered, as they were in vogue at the time.
Buffington Island Battlefield (boundary increase), Jackson County (and Meigs County, Ohio), nominated under Criteria A and D, Military and Social History, and Criterion Consideration F, Commemorative Properties, with periods of significance being 1863 and 1933-1934, was presented by Erin Riebe.
Ms. Riebe stated that SHPO was not provided an opportunity to review the draft but was presenting it on behalf of Ohio SHPO staff who could not attend.
Dr. Hohn asked if the nomination meets battlefield requirements of the National Register and if anything else should be considered, and he also noted that the date needs to be adjusted.
Chairman Conte noted that the secretary had e-mailed a copy to commission members and asked if the commission should file the by-laws as they are or revise further.
Dr. Hohn asked if the Division of Culture and History had a lawyer, and was informed by Chairman Conte they did not.
Mr. Armstrong made a motion that the Archives and History Commission secretary file the by-laws as procedural rules with the Secretary of State, as previously approved on February 1, 2002, by the commission, to be posted for approval and public notice.
