What I shall be considering is whether for the period in which they were built, their role in Mediæval life is as consequential as their reputation suggests and as one might initially suspect.
Obviously much evidence has been lost and one of the only other records from the time which mention my topic are financial records which have been evaluated in The King's Works, by H. Colvin and others.
Below: Beaumaris Castle, the last of the Edwardian fortresses of north Wales Nevertheless, I found that the place of the castle fell into three principal categories: the socio-economic and administrative role, the military role, and the role they played as a propagandist symbol of Edward's regal and divine authority over Wales.
When a new castle was begun, an entirely new town, or bastide, was also erected in most cases.
For example at Caernarvon the King spent at least £1818 out of a total expenditure of £3040 5s.
Already Edward had begun to repeat his familiar English practice of bending an outwardly fair law to his own advantage in Wales.
One could argue that alliances with members of Llywelyn's family and the experience and strength of the Marcher Lords were far more important in destroying Llywelyn's armed might than these structures.
As for the castles' role in this militarily hostile environment, it is arguable that they acted as much as deterrents to uprisings than as actual strongholds during the years of peace following the Conquest.
It continues to say that there are only twenty-eight fighting men in the town and castle and that it is too small a force.
In fact during the Glyn Dwr revolt Harlech fell to the Welsh, and was used as their headquarters.
It is therefore shown that whilst their part in suppressing the Welsh during the reign of 'the three Edwards' was generally successful, these castles in the long run were by no means the end of a Welsh military presence in Wales.
Below: Conwy Castle - one of Edward's most impressive castles of north Wales There is no doubt, though, that during these revolts the new settler towns which were all important to Edward's Welsh strategy were saved and protected by the castles whose rôle therefore, (overlapping slightly with the castle's social role), became somewhat economic.
In this sense, the castles were important but once again we have to ask ourselves if the lavish scale on which they were constructed was necessary simply to allow the development of the towns.
Beaumaris alone drained at least £6,736 from the King's treasury (when an average labourer was paid approximately 4d a day one realises what a huge sum this must have been) and in 1286, with the work at its height, nearly 950 men were employed under the supervision of James of St. George at Harlech.
We have seen how the castles were used but were not indispensable in the legal reforms which led the English policy of incorporating Wales into the realm.
Therefore it is here that one must look for the role of these castles.
They were already given superior privileges to the native Welsh and there is no doubt that the sheer scale and impressive nature of the new castles were used as yet another element of the propaganda to attract colonists, hitherto less than confident of the security of the new lands.
Edward was turning Caernarvon Castle not into a great defensive fortification but into a romanticised symbol of Edward's right to rule, reminding the Welsh that they had been conquered.
Edward was perhaps trying to crush what one might refer to in this century as nationalism (he even gathered all the Welsh bards and ... ordered them to be put to death.
The castles on the Welsh coast almost undoubtedly had implicit statements to make about royal ambition and power in Wales as much as general English aims - they were, from the start, on a completely different scale from those of the Marcher lords, (which many consider to be undeniably smaller but also more militarily efficient).
As in everything he did, Edward, in his Welsh conquests, wished to further his own royal power, prerogative and prestige.
i p. 374
Prestwich, Michael Armies and Warfare in the Middle Ages p 209ibidR. R. Davies, 'Colonial Wales', Past and present 65 (1974) p 173 Salzman, F. Edward I p 186 Prestwich, Michael Armies and Warfare in the Middle Ages p 209 Cywyddau Iolo Goch ac
Eraill p. 310 (2nd ed.
1937)Davies, R. R. The Revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr p 252 Froissart, Chronicles of (Brereton edition) p 449ibid Davies, R. R. The Revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr p 252ibid p 251
Both quotations Jeffrey L. Thomas Colvin, H. M. History of the King's Works vol.
