The occupants of these buildings called them castles and they are considered a variety of castle within the genre.
Tower Houses in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland The motte and bailey castle was introduced in England after the Norman Conquest.
William began a royal program of castle building for defensive purposes and to house garrisons and supplies.
Along with the king, greater barons built castles too.
Consequently, more mercenary soldiers were used.
There was no forebuilding, it was entered from ground level, and it was more lightly built and for the most part not attached to a larger fortified area.
A winding staircase would be built into the thickness of the wall or would be in a projecting corner tower.
Tower houses were a far more numerous and common feature in northern England and the borders where security was an issue.
Longthorpe is a three story tower that was added to an older house and built between 1290 and 1300 by the Thorpe family, who went from peasants to knights in just three generations.
By 1260 they were knights and had the resources to build a manor at Longthorpe along with a chapel.
Photo from geography.org.uk by Julian Dowse The most notable feature of Longthorpe Tower are the remarkable and rare wall paintings on the first floor that date from 1330-1350.
One of the finest examples of a medieval Scottish tower house is Craigmillar Castle in Edinburgh, built by the wealth Preston family.
They were built by the Anglo-Irish as well as Gaelic families during the years 1400 to 1650.
Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Ireland The majority of the castles in Ireland are tower houses.
The idea for them could also have been imported from England, Scotland or the Continent.
One would enter the lobby of the tower and on one side there might be a small porter’s station and on the other a spiral staircase to the upper levels.
Some examples of tower houses in Ireland that still exist are Kinlough Castle in Co. Galway, Dunguire Castle in Co. Galway, Bunratty Castle in Co.
Clare, Bourchiers’ Castle in Co.
There are a few surviving examples of tower houses in Central Europe but one of the best preserved is the ducal tower at Siedlecin in Lower Silesia, Poland.
Today the ducal tower of Siedlecin is the only place in the world where Lancelot paintings have been preserved in situ.
