In any journey, you must know the starting point in order to properly orient yourself towards your destination.
So, when we head into the desert, what exactly is our point of departure?
Thus, while there is certainly a risk of over-allegorizing the Old Testament, it is absolutely valid to see the exodus of the Israelites in at least its broadest outlines as a model for our own spiritual journey.
If we are drawn to the desert in Lent that means that we are called to leave Egypt.
If the desert symbolizes self-sacrifice and absolute dependence on God, then just what does Egypt represent for us today?
One was in Mesopotamia.
to its conquest by Alexander the Great in 332 B.C.—ancient Egypt was the preeminent civilization in the Mediterranean world.
The areas in which ancient Egyptians made significant advances range widely from astronomy, writing, mathematics, and medicine to ship-building, and construction.
From the still-standing pyramids to King Tut’s death mask and the mummies, Egypt continues to captivate us today.
More importantly, from the perspective of an ancient Israelite who left it, Egypt was civilization.
As the Encyclopedia Britannica puts it:Ancient Egypt can be thought of as an oasis in the desert of northeastern Africa, dependent on the annual inundation of the Nile River to support its agricultural population.
But then the story of the ancient Israelites may not seem as applicable to our own situation: as slaves they would have been excluded from the abundance of Egyptian society.
Some Church Fathers see the enslavement of the Hebrews as representing our own enslavement to our passions and various vices.
…For who does not know that the Egyptian army—those horses, chariots and their drivers, archers, slingers, heavily armed soldiers, and the rest of the crowd in the enemies’ line of battle—are the various passions of the soul by which man is enslaved?
For the undisciplined intellectual drives and the sensual impulses to pleasure, sorrow, and covetousness are indistinguishable from the aforementioned army.
As we are called to head into the desert into Lent, then, it helps to remember our point of departure: Egypt.
In leaving Egypt—the oasis of the desert—the Israelites had to depend on God for their basic sustenance of food and water, provided through the manna and the water from the rock.
And we are called to emulate the Israelites by separating ourselves from sin.
Lent indeed is particularly a season in which we are called to renew our commitment to a holy life and to put the old, fallen man behind us.
It had all the fruits of one of the most advanced civilizations in the ancient world.
For the ancient Israelites it meant enslavement, but it also was a place of comfort and certainty.
During Lent, then, we not only must have the courage and faith not only to go into the desert, but also to leave Egypt behind us.
