to its conquest by Alexander the Great in 332 B.C.—ancient Egypt was the preeminent civilization in the Mediterranean world.
During the rule of Akhenaton, his wife Nefertiti played an important political and religious role in the monotheistic cult of the sun god Aton.
A century later, King Menes would subdue the north and unify the country, becoming the first king of the first dynasty.
PERIOD (C. 3100-2686 B.C. )
The Old Kingdom began with the third dynasty of pharaohs.
Built for Khufu (or Cheops, in Greek), who ruled from 2589 to 2566 B.C., the pyramid was later named by classical historians as one of the ancient world’s Seven Wonders.
FIRST INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (C. 2181-2055 B.C.
From this era of conflict emerged two different kingdoms: A line of 17 rulers (dynasties nine and 10) based in Heracleopolis ruled Middle Egypt between Memphis and Thebes, while another family of rulers arose in Thebes to challenge Heracleopolitan power.
12TH DYNASTY (C. 2055-1786 B.C. )
After the last ruler of the 11th dynasty, Mentuhotep IV, was assassinated, the throne passed to his vizier, or chief minister, who became King Amenemhet I, founder of dynasty 12.
During the Middle Kingdom, Egypt once again flourished, as it had during the Old Kingdom.
The kingdom also built diplomatic and trade relations with Syria, Palestine and other countries; undertook building projects including military fortresses and mining quarries; and returned to pyramid-building in the tradition of the Old Kingdom. ), who was the first confirmed female ruler of Egypt and the last ruler of the 12th dynasty.
The official royal court and seat of government was relocated to Thebes, while a rival dynasty (the 14th), centered on the city of Xois in the Nile delta, seems to have existed at the same time as the 13th.
The Hyksos rulers of the 15th dynasty adopted and continued many of the existing Egyptian traditions in government as well as culture.
NEW KINGDOM (C. 1567-1085 B.C.
During the 18th dynasty, Egypt restored its control over Nubia and began military campaigns in Palestine, clashing with other powers in the area such as the Mitannians and the Hittites.
The kings who followed Ramses III were less successful: Egypt lost its provinces in Palestine and Syria for good and suffered from foreign invasions (notably by the Libyans), while its wealth was being steadily but inevitably depleted.
THIRD
INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (C. 1085-664 B.C.
The 22nd dynasty began around 945 B.C. Many local rulers were virtually autonomous during this period and dynasties 23-24 are poorly documented.
FROM THE LATE PERIOD TO ALEXANDER’S CONQUEST (C.664-332 B.C.
After Alexander’s death, Egypt was ruled by a line of Macedonian kings, beginning with Alexander’s general Ptolemy and continuing with his descendants.
